The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Cross and the Hammer, by Henry
Bedford-Jones

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: The Cross and the Hammer
       A Tale of the Days of the Vikings

Author: Henry Bedford-Jones

Release Date: February 28, 2022 [eBook #67528]

Language: English

Produced by: Al Haines

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CROSS AND THE
HAMMER ***







  THE CROSS AND
  THE HAMMER

  _A Tale of the Days of the Vikings_


  _By H. BEDFORD-JONES_



  PUBLISHED BY
  DAVID C. COOK PUBLISHING Co.
  ELGIN, ILLINOIS




  COPYRIGHT, 1912.
  BY DAVID C. COOK PUBLISHING Co.,
  ELGIN, ILLINOIS.




  CONTENTS.

  I. How the Vow Was Made
  II. The Shooting Match
  III. Jarl Hakon of Norway
  IV. The Rescue in the Bay
  V. The Escape from Thrandheim
  VI. Hiorunga Bay
  VII. How Vagn Kept His Vow
  VIII. "Skoal to King Olaf!"
  IX. How Astrid Fared Forth
  X. Farewell to Dublin
  XI. At Ethelred's Court
  XII. The Flight From London
  XIII. Alfred of Mercia
  XIV. In Bretland
  XV. In Winter Quarters
  XVI. An Ambuscade
  XVII. Ketil Turns Up
  XVIII. A Mission for the King
  XIX. At King Svein's Court
  XX. The King and the Towel
  XXI. The Death of Hakon
  XXII. The Sacrifice To Thor
  XXIII. How the Chiefs Were Baptized
  XXIV. Olaf's Atonement
  XXV. The Wrestling Match
  XXVI. The Cross and the Hammer




FOREWORD.

This is a story about the very real people and events; if ever you
chance to read the old Sagas of Norway you will come upon most of the
characters of this tale.  The viking age was not Christian, it was
full of the clash of arms and of unknightly deeds, yet its story is
vitally interesting.

The Hammer of Thor, the War-god of northern Europe, did not yield to
the Cross of Christ without a struggle, and the story of Norway's
conversion is intensely dramatic.  King Hakon the Good, a foster-son
of the English King Athelstan, was forced to recant his faith in
order to hold his throne; King Olaf Triggveson lost his kingdom, or
rather gave it up, at Svolde Sound, because he refused to do the
like; and King Olaf the Thick, who followed him, fell beneath the
heathen weapons of his subjects, becoming the patron saint of Norway.

It was the first King Olaf who broke the power of the old gods and
who introduced Christianity into his realm.  Short as was his reign,
he was the greatest king Norway ever had.  He built the first church
in the land, and sent the first missionaries to Iceland; during his
reign Thangbrand, the priest, won that island to the true faith.

Many of the incidents narrated are taken direct from the Sagas, and
although King Olaf is said to have died at Svolde, the story of his
escape is well authenticated; I give his own words in refusing to win
back his kingdom.  He went to Rome and the Holy Land and held rule
there under the Crusader Kings of Jerusalem, dying fifty years later.
King Edward the Confessor used to have the story of his life chanted
to his court once every year, upon his death being reported in
England during that king's reign.

H. BEDFORD-JONES.




NOTES.

"_bonders._"--This word is used in the Sagas to represent the free
farmers of Norway, who held their lands from the king, or owned them;
they were subject only to the orders of the king or his Jarls, and
are equivalent to our own "farmers," except that they had special
rights and privileges.

"_scat._"--A fine or any other penalty which might be imposed on an
offender by an assembly of the people.  The scat was usually a fine
of money, lands, or goods.

"_skoal._"--This plain word corresponds to our own "Hurrah!"  It
means both long life, good health, and joy, and is still used in
Norway in that sense.

I have avoided the use of many words which are usually retained in
the translations of the old Sagas. Nearly all the facts about which
the story of Sigurd Fairhair is woven are historical, and are taken
from the Heimskringla, and the Saga of King Olaf by the Abbot Berg
Sokkason.  Both histories were compiled from the accounts of
eye-witnesses of the events contained therein, to a great extent, and
especially was this true with the life of Olaf Triggveson.--_The
Author_.




The Cross and the Hammer

_A Tale of the Days of the Vikings_

_By H. BEDFORD-JONES_



CHAPTER I.

HOW THE VOW WAS MADE.

The great hall of the Danish kings at Leira was filled to overflowing
on this autumn evening of the year 994, for King Harald Gormson had
fallen in battle some weeks before, and his son Svein Twyskiegge, of
Forkbeard, was celebrating his accession feast in the hall of his
fathers.

Around the town lay a whole city of tents and brush huts, for besides
the Danish lords present, sixty ships had come from Jomsborg, bearing
the noblest of the famous Viking brotherhood, under their chiefs Jarl
Sigvald and Bui the Thick.  Visitors and Danes were clad in their
bravest array, and both town and camp presented a scene of the gayest
festivity.

Within, the hall was hung with ancient arms and trophies of the
chase, the floor was strewn with a thick layer of fresh rushes, and
the long tables were heaped high with dishes.  At one end of the hall
sat King Svein, with his chiefs and the Jomsborg nobles, while above
them towered the high-seat or throne of the king; along the hall were
ranged the vikings and men of Denmark, with Queen Gunhild and her
ladies sitting at the far end.

Servants flitted in and out, bearing food and horns of ale, while in
the center of the hall, between the tables and before the seat of the
king, sat two skalds, singing to the music of their harps the great
deeds of King Harald and of his son, the new king.  Presently, as the
hunger of the throng was somewhat appeased, all began to wonder what
vow the king would make, for it was the custom that at the heirship
feast the new king should make a vow to do some great and noble deed.

Seated near Queen Gunhild as guests of honor were two boys, one fair
and ruddy-cheeked, the other darker and with very quick, bold eyes.
The latter, Vagn Akison, was a nephew of Bui, the Jomsborg chief, and
grandson of Palnatoki, the founder of the viking brotherhood;
although he was only seventeen, he and his cousin Sigurd were already
well known for the prowess.

Sigurd Fairhair, who was a year younger than Vagn, was in high
spirits to-night, for a little before King Svein had given him a very
fine sword, and he was proud of it.

Glancing over at him with a smile, Queen Gunhild said, "Sigurd, have
you shown Astrid your new sword?"

"Of course he has," replied Astrid, her niece, who sat beside Sigurd,
and her dark eyes gleamed with fun.  "He is going to try its edge on
the big pine tree near the harbor to-morrow!"

At this sally a laugh went up, and Vagn cried, "Be careful not to
bring down the tree into the harbor, Sigurd!  It would be a pity to
sink all our best ships!"

Sigurd reddened, and retorted, "Well, I never aroused the whole camp
just because a pig was wandering around in the bushes!"

This turned the laugh on his cousin, who had wakened the camp the
night before, mistaking a pig for a spy, and even the Queen joined
heartily in the merriment.

Suddenly a silence fell on the tables, for King Svein had arisen and
was holding in both hands a great silver bowl.  Amid a dead hush he
drained it, handed it to an attendant, and stepped to the high-seat.
Grasping an arm of this, the king turned.

"Here, as I ascend the throne of my father Harald, I vow that with
the help of God I will lead my fleet to the land of England, and ere
three winters have passed I will chase King Ethelred from the land
and sit in his throne!"

[Illustration: "_I will lead my fleet to the land of England._"]

As King Svein took his seat a low murmur of astonishment ran around
the hall, followed by a tremendous shout of "Skoal!  Skoal!" for this
was a great vow to be fulfilled.

"See how pale the Queen is," whispered Astrid to Sigurd.  "The vow
must have surprised her also."

Indeed, Queen Gunhild had turned white, for the King's vow meant that
a great war would be undertaken, and how it would end no man could
tell.  Before Sigurd could reply, Jarl Sigvald arose and called for
silence.

"Men of Denmark and Jomsborg," he said slowly, in his deep voice, the
light glinting on his dark, strong face and black eyes, "I also would
make a vow, and no light one.  As you all know, Jarl Hakon, a heathen
man and doubly a traitor, rules Norway while the rightful king,
Tryggvee's son, is a wanderer or mayhap dead.  This then is my vow:
that I go to Norway ere three winters pass, take the rule from the
hands of Jarl Hakon, and drive him from the land."

Sigvald sat down, amid a dead hush of amazement; but it was broken by
a shout from young Vagn Akison.

"Skoal, Jarl Sigvald, skoal!"

Then what a cheer went up!  Ere it subsided, Sigvald's brother,
Thorkel the Tall, leaped to his feet and swore to follow the Jarl;
Bui the Thick joined him, and amid fresh cheers, Vagn, from the other
end of the hall, cried:

"I, too!  And ere I return I will slay Thorkel Leira, the villain who
betrayed my father to his death!"

"Skoal!" shouted Sigurd, excitedly, "I'm with you, Vagn!"

As the tumult subsided, the Queen looked at Vagn and Sigurd sadly.
"You are rash boys, you two!  Do you realize what blood and tears
these oaths will cost?"

Sigurd answered her respectfully.  "Noble Gunhild, that may well be;
yet Jarl Hakon is an evil man and a pagan, as is Thorkel.  At any
rate, I won't have to try my new sword on the tree, now!"  His keen
gray eyes twinkled.

The Queen made no reply, however, and sat watching King Svein; but
Astrid whispered:

"I think that was splendid!  I wish I could go, too!"

Vagn laughed.  "You'd be a fine one!  Why, the first war-horn would
send you down below trembling!"

"It wouldn't either!" retorted the girl indignantly.  "I can shoot
better than you or Sigurd, either of you!"

"Good!  I challenge you to a match to-morrow," cried Sigurd.  "We'll
go over to the shore beyond the harbor, where no one will interrupt,
and if you best either of us I'll give you my trained falcon from
France!"

"Then look out," laughed Astrid, "because I'm going to win the bird
to-morrow morning!"

With this she arose and followed the Queen, who was leaving.  The two
boys, not wishing to join in the carouse that most of the vikings
would keep up for the better part of the night, also left the hall
and proceeded to their own tent.

"What think you of these vows, Sigurd?" asked Vagn, as they went
along.

"Well, now that we have cooled down, it looks rather different,"
replied Sigurd, thoughtfully.  "It is one thing for King Svein to
conquer England, with the resources of a realm at his command, and
another for Sigvald to conquer Norway with only the brother of
Jomsborg behind him."

"But remember, Fairhair, we are Christians, while Hakon is a pagan
and a traitor; that will make some difference, surely!  My own vow
was no hasty thing; I must avenge my father's death or else be
disgraced forever."

Sigurd nodded thoughtfully, for he well knew that the fierce vikings
would yield small obedience to a man who appeared unable to avenge
the betrayal of his father.  As they turned in at their tent, a man
ran up, and Vagn recognized one of Bui's men in the moonlight.

"Hello, Egil, what is it?"

"You and Sigurd are wanted at council in Jarl Sigvald's big tent,"
panted the man.

Without delay, the boys followed him to the large tent of the Jarl.
Here they found all the Jomsborg leaders assembled, and took their
places beside Bui of Bornholm, who was speaking as they entered.

"It was a rash vow, Sigvald, but we cannot back out, and it may well
be that we shall win great honor in the effort, win or lose.  Our
vikings are the best warriors in the world to-day, and we will at
least give a hard battle to Hakon and his son Eirik."

A murmur of assent ran around the tent, and Sigvald arose.

"Brothers, I was over-hasty in the vow, but it cannot be helped.
This is my counsel; that since the attempt must be made, we make it
without delay, send for the rest of our men, and strike at Norway's
capital without delay.  What think you?"

Vagn stepped forward.  "I will answer for my father's ships and men.
Let us strike before Hakon can meet us; we have the pick of our men
here, with most of our ships.  We can leave here at the end of the
week, wait at Limafiord for the rest of our men, then sweep up to
Thrandheim."

"Good for you, Vagn!" cried his uncle.  "Men say that I am somewhat
stout, but my friends never complain of my weight in battle!"
Everyone laughed, for although Bui deserved his nickname, he was one
of the greatest warriors of the day.  "I'll let Sigurd here go with
you, if you want him," he continued, and the boy's heart leaped with
joy, for this was indeed just what he did want.

Jarl Sigvald smiled.  "Then is it agreed that we go from here to
Limafiord on the fourth day?"

"Yes!"  The answer was accompanied by a clash of weapons, as the
chiefs struck sword and spear on shield, and the council was over,
although most of the leaders remained to talk over details and
despatch a messenger to Jomsborg at once.

The boys returned to their tent, however, and as they dropped off to
sleep the shouts of "Skoal!  Skoal!" drifted faintly to them from the
town, and they knew that the vikings and the Danes were still making
vows, some of which they would bitterly repent in the morning.




CHAPTER II.

THE SHOOTING-MATCH.

Early next morning the boys were afoot, and after a hasty breakfast
beside a camp fire they took their bows and quivers and started for
town.

Astrid lived with Queen Gunhild at the Kings' Hall, and thither they
directed their steps.  Early as it was, the place was thronged with
servants, who were laying fresh rushes in the hall and putting the
place in order for the day.  Seeing a house-carl pass, with his
clipped hair and golden collar, Sigurd called him and sent him to ask
if the Lady Astrid was ready.

Five minutes later Astrid herself appeared, bearing bow and quiver,
and joined them with a cheery, "Good-morning, my vikings!  Has your
rash resolution cooled off yet?"

"Small chance of that," replied Vagn, his half-grave, half-humorous
eyes lighting up in a quick smile.

"My falcon is ready to change owners," added Sigurd, "but then there
is no chance for that to-day, of course."

"Oh, indeed!"  Astrid's dark eyes flashed gayly.  "That remains to be
seen, my lord of Jomsborg and Bornholm!"

Talking and laughing, they started off, leaving the town behind and
cutting across the fields to the harbor.  There, as they came to the
brow of the hill, they paused.  Far below lay the great fleet, the
sixty Jomsborg ships and those of the assembled Danish lords, their
shield-rims glittering in the morning sun, their dragon-prows and
high carved sterns gilded or painted in bright array.

Astrid caught her breath in admiration.  "Oh, how wonderful it is to
be a viking!  I wish I were a boy!"

The other two laughed.  "It is not so very wonderful," smiled Sigurd.
"I think it is hard work.  Every morning the drilling and practice in
arms, the weapons to be rubbed up--and the rowing!  Whew, my back
hurts even to think of those low, heavy oars!"

"There's our ship, with the gilded prow," pointed Vagn, to a large
long-ship apart from the rest.  "Sigurd talks a lot about work, but
he is equal to any man in the fleet with sword and shield, save his
father, or the Jarl--"

"Or yourself," broke in his cousin quickly.  "However, let's get on;
I'm anxious to decide the fate of my falcon."

They left the road, and after walking two or three miles, came out on
a lonely stretch of shore, wild and rocky.  Vagn had brought an old
wooden shield with him, and he set this up as target on a large rock
a hundred feet distant.

"Do you shoot first," ordered Astrid.  "I'll go next, then Vagn."

Sigurd nodded, and selected an arrow.  Stringing his bow, he laid the
shaft and pulled the string to his ear.  Twang!  The arrow was buried
deep in the shield, just above the center boss of iron.

"Good enough!" cried Vagn, running forward, but Astrid only smiled
and raised her bow.  The string twanged, and an answering echo came
back as the arrow glanced off and the shield fell backward.

"Hurrah!" cried Vagn, picking it up.  "Full on the iron boss!  But
you can't do it again!"

Sigurd ran forward to see also, and as they examined the shield, a
sudden cry startled them.  Turning, they saw Astrid struggling with
three men, while more appeared coming from behind a corner of the
cliff.

"Norsemen and spies!" exclaimed Sigurd, and without an instant's
hesitation he picked up Astrid's arrow and ran forward, fitting it to
his bow.

"Your sword!" called Vagn, tearing the peace-bands from his own
weapon as he ran.  A shout answered him, and the Norseman ran forward
to meet Sigurd.  A spear whizzed by his head, and he loosed the bow.

The foremast viking fell with a clash, and as the others paused
Sigurd tore the peace-bands from his sword.  Next instant he was
surrounded, struggling, striking, and he realized that more and more
men had appeared from behind the cliff.

Now a blade gleamed beside him, and Vagn's voice sounded in his ear.
One man was down--two; but others filled their places, and a heavy
axe was poised over Sigurd.  As it fell the boy darted in beneath the
blow, and his sword fell on the viking's shoulder; but at that
instant something crashed on his light steel cap, and he knew no more.

Sigurd awoke with a dull pain in his head, to find his arms tightly
bound and the midday sun beating down on him.  Raising his head,
Fairhair saw that he lay on the forecastle of a small ship, with Vagn
beside him, wounded in the shoulder and unconscious.

He saw nothing of Astrid, and a burning thirst consumed him; with a
great effort he rose to a sitting position and looked around.  They
were out at sea, and the land lay far behind them; in the stern and
waist of the ship were fifteen or twenty Norsemen.

"That was a stiff crack I gave you, lad, but the steel cap saved your
skull," sounded a voice, and Sigurd twisted around.  Behind him stood
a dark man with an unpleasant face and straw-colored hair; evidently
he was the leader, for he had just come out of the cabin.

Sigurd tried to speak, but his tongue was dry, and the man laughed.
"Here, Thord," he called, "bring a horn of water."

One of the men in the waist took a horn and filled it from the cask
beside the mast, handing it up to the leader, who put it to the boy's
lips.  Sigurd drank greedily, and then the other threw a few drops
over Vagn, who opened his eyes.

He struggled to rise, with a sharp cry.

"Thorkel Leira!  I--"  The effort was too much for him, and he fell
back again.  Their captor smiled sneeringly.

"He is in a bad way to fulfill his vow, eh?"  This was the man whom
Vagn had sworn to kill, the betrayer of his father!  As he realized
this, Sigurd's head cleared.

"Why have you attacked us?  Who are you?" he asked indignantly.

Thorkel laughed again.  "Vagn, there, seemed to know my face!  You
two and the girl, whom I take to be Gunhild's niece, will make a nice
gift to Jarl Hakon!  Great boasts, great boasts!"

Sigurd flushed.  As he looked at the viking, his heart gave a sudden
leap, for, framed in the cabin doorway behind, he saw the face of
Astrid, her finger on her lips.  Making no sign, he answered the
leader calmly.

"In that case, leave us alone till we get to Thrandheim."  As he said
this, Sigurd lay down again, turning his back on Thorkel.  The latter
sneered, and stepped to the edge of the forecastle, above the ship's
waist.  Sigurd opened his eyes, and saw Astrid making signs, and
holding in her hand his sword.

Sigurd comprehended the plan instantly.  He silently drew his feet up
and gathered his muscles; Thorkel was giving orders, a few paces
away, and paid no heed to him.  The boy slowly rose to one knee; he
saw Astrid run toward him, and at the same instant he threw himself
headfirst at Thorkel, striking him fairly in the waist.

The viking fell forward with a cry, and lay motionless on the deck
beneath.  Sigurd would have followed him over the low rail, but for a
hand that gripped his bound arms and stayed him; then he felt the
bonds cut and a sword pushed into his hand.

"Hold the ladder," panted the girl, "while I arouse Vagn."

Sigurd sprang to the top of the narrow ladder that led up from the
deck below just as the surprised men seized their weapons.  An arrow
tore through his hair; another followed, but Sigurd parried it with
his blade, and another after it.  This was an old viking exercise,
and the boy felt no fear; but with a cry of dismay Astrid ran to the
cabin, quickly returning with a shield.

"Here, this will help you!"  Sigurd grasped it just in time to ward
off a spear, and now the first man was on the ladder.  He held a
shield above his head, but Sigurd swung his sword and brought it down
with all his might.  The keen weapon sheared through the tough bull's
hide, and the man fell back among his comrades.

Thord, who had brought the water, now made a dash, coming up the
ladder three steps at a time, and wielding an axe.  As he reached the
top Sigurd drove his sword, but too late; the axe descended on his
shield and bore him to his knees.  Again the weapon whirled above
him, and Thord staggered backward with a hoarse cry, clearing the
ladder in his fall.

Springing up, Sigurd saw Astrid behind him, bow in hand, and Vagn,
pale but determined, stepped to his side.  Those below drew back, and
the boys saw them reviving Thorkel, who was stunned by his fall.
Sigurd leaned on his sword.

"Look here, Vagn, we can't keep this up all day; one or two good
showers of arrows will finish us."

Vagn pointed to the cabin.  "We can hold that against them all, and
Astrid says that food and water are inside."

Sigurd laughed.  "You look like a Valkyrie, Astrid!  I owe you thanks
for my life, too--but what is Thorkel up to?"

"Back--back to the cabin!" cried Astrid.  "They are climbing around
the bow to take us from behind!"

A glance showed them half a dozen men climbing through the bow under
the dragon's head up to the forecastle.  It was useless to try to
hold the whole fore-deck, so the two boys and Astrid ran to the
cabin, shut the heavy door, and bolted it securely.  There was no
window, and only one or two high loop-holes gave fresh air to those
within.

"What chance have we of rescue?" asked Astrid, sitting down on a pile
of furs.

"Little enough," replied Vagn, moodily, while Sigurd threw himself
down beside her.  "No one knows where we went, and we won't be missed
till noon.  It must be about three hours past that now."

The Norsemen, realizing the futility of trying to break in, made no
sign; and the afternoon slowly wore away.  The ship was bearing north
under full sail, and all three captives realized that it was only a
matter of time before they would have to give up.

Evidently the Norsemen had been spying on the Danes.  Vagn had been
struck down by a glancing blow, and all three had been taken to the
ship, which left the land at once.  Astrid had been left unbound, and
had taken advantage of the opportunity as soon as Sigurd became
conscious.

Toward evening a rap sounded on the door, and the voice of Thorkel
called to them:

"Vagn Akison!  Can you hear me?"




CHAPTER III.

JARL HAKON OF NORWAY.

"Well enough," replied Vagn, "what is it?"

"I suppose you see that you cannot hold out for ever; but it would be
needless trouble for my men to batter in the door.  To-morrow we will
meet Jarl Hakon, and if you give yourselves up in peace I will not
bind you."

"What shall we do?" whispered Vagn.  "It is true that we cannot hold
out here."

"Do!" exclaimed Astrid.  "Would you trust your father's betrayer?
Wait till we meet Hakon, that will be time enough to give up!"

Vagn raised his voice.  "We wish nought to do with traitors, Thorkel.
Let Jarl Hakon speak with us; till then we will bide."

Thorkel made no answer, and they heard him move away.  The three
captives ate some of the food, drank a little stale water, and with
nightfall the boys took watch and watch, leaving the single couch to
Astrid.

Toward morning, however, the latter awoke and insisted on doing her
share of the watching; so Sigurd, dead tired, yielded up his watch
and dropped off to sleep.  The boys were now suffering from their
wounds, but they had refused to let Astrid bind them up, as this was
strictly against the laws of the Jomsvikings.

These fierce men were trained with the greatest strictness, indeed,
and death was the penalty for the slightest infraction of their laws.
Wounds might not be bound up, and no pain might be complained of; for
suffering was only part of the long training that made the Jomsborg
brotherhood the most terrible fighters in the world.

Both boys were wakened by a jar that shook the ship, and they found
the sun well up.  "What was that shock?" they cried, in alarm.

"Another ship," replied Astrid.  "I can see nothing, but I heard the
sound of oars and voices."

Springing to the loopholes, they found that they could see nothing;
but the sound of excited talking came to them, and in a few moments
steps advanced quickly to the door.

"Ho, Vagn Akison!  Astrid of Vendland!  Open!"

Astrid seized Vagn's arm.  "It is Jarl Hakon!  I know his voice well!"

Without hesitation, Sigurd, sheathing his sword, threw open the door.
There in the sunlight stood a man of lofty stature, magnificently
armed and with beard and hair as sunny as that of Sigurd; but his
face was gloomy, and his eyes quick and shifty.

"Do you yield to me?" he asked quietly.

Astrid laughed.  "So you war against girls, Jarl?  Well, I suppose I
must surrender!"

The Jarl smiled, and laid his hand on her hair.  "Keep the bow,
child; you have done nobly and well.  Come to my own ship."

As they followed him down the ladder and over the side, Sigurd saw
that Hakon's hair was streaked with gray, and that he walked stiffly
as from old wounds.  Beside Thorkel's ship lay another, a splendid
warship, and as they climbed over the bulwarks the two ships were
cast apart.  Hakon led the way to his cabin, and said, kindly:

"Sit you down and fear not.  Thorkel has told me the tale of the
vows, especially that of yours, Vagn Akison.  By the hammer of Thor,
your comrades will have tough work if they think to take Norway from
me!"  He smiled grimly.

"Jarl," exclaimed Astrid, "was it by your orders that we have been
attacked?  Remember that Svein is my uncle!"

Hakon nodded.  "I am sorry, indeed, that you were taken; you will be
returned unharmed later, with whatever scat Svein thinks just.  But
who are you, Fairhair?"

Sigurd laughed.  "That is truly what men call me, Jarl; my name is
Sigurd Buisson."

Hakon whistled in surprise.  "So!  Then I have two good hostages!
All the better; I will take you up to Thrandheim with me, but have no
fear, for you will be well treated--at least for the present."

With this Hakon left the cabin, giving it up to them, and the voyage
began.  The boys were indeed treated well, their weapons were left
them, and had it not been for the surrounding circumstances they
would have enjoyed themselves immensely.

That night they made the southern end of Norway, for the ship was
pushed on with all speed, both of sail and oars.  Jarl Hakon was
racing for his kingdom now, and no effort was spared to reach
Thrandheim, Norway's capital, as soon as might be.

Next morning they landed at Howes, and Hakon sent speedy messengers
north over the mountains to his son Jarl Eirik, who was in Raumarike;
and splitting up war arrows, dispatched them to all the chiefs near
by as a token to gather men at once.  Then, with fresh rowers, the
ship hastened on as never ship had hastened before, for the realm of
Norway was at stake.

The following evening they stopped at Raumsdale to send out the
war-arrow and get new rowers; but they pushed on quickly, and on the
third day sped up the Thrandheim Firth and reached the city just
after sunset.

An immense crowd greeted them, for the news had sped fast, and they
landed amid a great shouting and clash of arms.  Jarl Hakon kept the
boys with him, and sent Astrid to the King's Hall, where she would be
given waiting-women and cared for as became her rank.  Then, without
going thither himself, he turned aside, followed by all the
multitude, and proceeded to the great temple of Thor, the War-god.

Jarl Hakon was a pagan, believing firmly in the old gods of Norway,
as indeed most of his subjects did.  The Thrandheim temple was the
greatest in the land, and Jarl Hakon, as ruler of the country, was
the high-priest.

As they passed beneath the great stone doorway Sigurd Fairhair
shivered, and Vagn whispered to him, "Firm, Sigurd, hold firm!"

Sigurd pressed his hand in reply.  As they saw whither they were
going, the boys had resolved not to take part in the worship of the
heathen gods, for both were Christians.  The temple was high and
gloomy, and the torches lit it very poorly; but around the sides they
could see statues of Odin the one-eyed, Freya the beautiful, and the
other gods.  At the end, opposite the doorway, stood a high altar
before the golden statue of Thor, and Hakon slowly ascended the steps.

As he did so, the vikings, bonders, and townfolk fell on their knees,
and beyond the altar Sigurd noticed the priests bringing in a white
bull for sacrifice.  Looking around, he saw that he and Vagn were the
only ones standing; others saw it, too, and an angry mutter ran
through the vast building, like the low gathering of a storm.

The two boys paled, but stood firm and erect, as Jarl Hakon uttered a
short prayer to the war god.  When his voice ceased, the mutter
behind him swelled into a roar, with fierce shouts of "Kneel!"
"Kneel!" "Death to the Christians!"

Hakon turned and raised his hand, the roar dying away at once.  When
he saw the cause of the tumult his face darkened.

"To your knees, to your knees!  Would you insult Thor in his own
temple?"

"We kneel to none save the white Christ," spoke out Sigurd boldly,
though his heart beat fast.

Hakon's hand flew to his sword, and the crowd surged forward; then
the Jarl's hand dropped, and he motioned to one of his men.

"Harald, take these two to the King's Hall and see that no harm comes
to them, on your life.  Go!"

Without a word the boys followed the man as he led the way out, their
heads high and their hands on their swords.  The Norsemen made way
for them with muttered threats, but gaining the open air, their guide
led them through the dark streets, and in a few minutes stopped at
the Hall.

They were led to a room, and the door was bolted.  At the rasp of the
bolt Vagn broke silence.

"Whew!  That was a close shave for us, old man!  I was scared stiff
when you answered Hakon!"

"So was I," admitted Sigurd, smiling.  "But we are too valuable as
hostages, so it didn't take much bravery.  See here, are we going to
stay with Hakon?"

"Not if we can help it," laughed Vagn.  "I suppose we'll be watched
closely, though, and then we must look out for Astrid."

Sigurd nodded.  "Well, we'll see her in the morning.  She is not in
danger for the present, anyway."

Sigurd was mistaken, however, for they did not see Astrid for a week.
They were closely confined to their room, and only on the sixth day
following were they allowed to leave it.  Their warder was the same
who had led them from the temple the first night.  As he came in on
the sixth morning, he left the door open, and said:

"You are free of the town, but do not leave it.  Jarl Hakon has gone,
so you had best be watchful, as I am responsible for you."

"Where has Hakon gone?  Is the Lady Astrid here?" asked Vagn.

"I know nothing of any Lady Astrid, but Jarl Hakon has gone south to
More to raise men, and will return to meet Jarl Eirik, mayhap."

The two boys did not wait to learn more, but hastened out to the
great hall, and there they found a woman who directed them to
Astrid's room.  Making their way thither, Astrid came to the door
with a cry of joy.

"Oh, I thought you were dead!  I saw Jarl Hakon once, but he was
terribly busy and would tell me nothing.  Where have you been?"

Vagn outlined their adventure at the temple, and told of their
subsequent imprisonment in a few words.

"I never would have dared do that!" exclaimed Astrid as he finished.
"To brave all those men that way!  But come over here to this window
and speak low; there are women in the next room."

Making sure that the door was fast, Sigurd and Vagn joined her at the
window.

"Last night I heard two men talking out in the hall, and I listened.
Jarl Eirik has gathered a great force of men from Raumadale and
Halogaland and Thrandheim, and is fitting out an immense fleet in the
greatest haste.  Hakon is raising men in North and South More.  Two
nights ago, just before Hakon left, a messenger came from Eirik.

"Here is their plan.  When Hakon has raised all the men he can, he
will come north to meet Eirik, who is making his way south.  They
expect to have at least 150 longships when they combine forces, and
intend to wait for your fleet in Hiorunga Bay and take them in a
trap."

"A trap!" cried Sigurd.  "With that great force?"

"Yes, because they are afraid of the men of Jomsborg, even with the
numbers three to one.  The peasants are to tell Jarl Sigvald that
Hakon is in Hiorunga Bay with only one or two ships, and Sigvald and
Bui will hurry in to capture him, thus falling among the whole fleet.
Do you see?"

Sigurd's eyes flashed.  "So Hakon is a traitor still!  This is
terrible, Vagn; in a trap like that no one will escape!"

"I am afraid not, Fairhair," Vagn shook his head sadly.  "Sigvald
will fall into it, for he is impetuous and hasty, as is your father
also.  I see only one thing to do."

"What is that?" cried the others, as he paused.

"That is for you, Sigurd, and me to steal a boat here in the harbor
and sail out south.  We have a bare chance of reaching Sigvald in
time.  Has Eirik reached Thrandheim yet?"  He turned to Astrid.

"Not yet, but he is expected at any time."

"Then we may make it!" broke in Sigurd, excitedly.

Here Astrid drew herself up, and said, in a determined voice, "Wait a
minute!  If you go I go, too; you needn't think you can leave me
behind!"




CHAPTER IV.

THE RESCUE IN THE BAY.

"That you sha'n't," replied Vagn.  "We may be blown out to sea or
captured by Eirik or Hakon; there is no telling.  You are safe here."

Astrid's eyes flashed, and she cried, angrily, "I say I will go!  If
we are taken, I will be just as safe; and you two can handle a small
boat in any sea."

"But, Astrid," objected Sigurd, in dismay, "at best it will take us
three days, and--"

"So much the more need of another person.  Now say no more."  She set
her mouth determinedly, and Vagn's opposition vanished in a peal of
laughter.

"Come on," he cried gayly; "I would rather fight a dozen Norsemen
than try to oppose you!  We'll go down to the harbor now and see
about a boat."

"You seem to think it is no more than a matter of picking out a boat
and raising the sail," laughed Sigurd, as they left the hall.

"No," returned Vagn, "but there's no use thinking about obstacles
before they appear."

The streets were thronged with men from the countryside roundabout,
and the armorers seemed to be doing a thriving business.  No one paid
any attention to the three, and they soon made their way to the
waterside.

As they walked slowly along, looking at the ships in the harbor,
Sigurd suddenly stopped.

"Hurrah!  I believe that I have a better plan still!" he cried.  "Do
you see that ship over there with the yellow eyes painted in her
prow?"

"What of her?" asked Vagn.

"Don't you remember?  She was in Jomsborg a month since, and her
captain is an old friend of Jarl Sigvald's.  Why can't we get him to
take us down below Hiorunga Bay to meet the fleet?"

"The very thing!"  Astrid clapped her hands in delight.  "I confess
that it seemed well-nigh hopeless to make our way in a small boat
without being captured or blown far out to sea.  But suppose he won't
take us?"

"He will," returned Vagn, "I remember his name--Ulf Ringsson, and he
will be glad to help Sigvald.  How shall we see him?"

"Do you take Astrid back to the hall, and I will row out in a small
boat," replied Sigurd.  "If any are watching us, we will throw them
off that way."

So Astrid and Vagn turned back, and Sigurd sauntered about for a
time, as if watching the shipping.  Presently he wandered down to a
boatman.

"Lend me your boat for an hour or two, my friend," he said, handing
the man a coin.

"Willingly," responded the man, pushing out his craft and putting the
oars into it.  "Business is not so good these days; I fear that I may
have to go with Jarl Eirik if I want to make money!"

"Better not," laughed Sigurd, "you might meet Jomsborg steel, and
that would be bad luck."

The man chuckled as he shoved Sigurd off.  "No danger, my lord!  If
I'm not here when you return, just pull the boat up and leave her."

Sigurd nodded, and pulled slowly from the shore.  He did not head
straight out to the ship, but visited other craft first, asking
questions of their crews and appearing simply curious.  After a
little he reached the side of Ulf's ship, and slipping under the side
opposite the shore, clambered over the rail.

As he set foot on the deck, a tall man rose and faced him.  "Who are
you and what do you want?"

Sigurd smiled and took off his fur cap.  "I want Ulf Ringsson, and I
am Sigurd Buisson of Bornholm."

Ulf grasped his hand with a cry of surprise, and led him to the cabin.

"The crew is ashore, but it is best to take no chances.  Now what are
you doing here?  I heard you had been taken by Hakon."

The boy swiftly outlined his adventures, told of the trap that was to
be laid for the Jomsborg fleet, and asked Ulf to help them.

"Of course, Sigurd, of course!  I can stow you two and the Lady
Astrid away comfortably, but if we are overhauled--well, my men are
no fighters, you know!"

"We'll take our chance of that," replied Sigurd, thanking him warmly
for his aid.  "Now, when can you sail?  Every minute counts."

"I know, but I can't possibly start sooner than the morning of the
third day from now.  Say midnight of the second night after this.  My
cargo is not all in, and it would look too suspicious altogether.
But the 'Otter' is a fast ship, and we will get down the coast much
faster than will Eirik with his warships."

"You can expect us then," said Sigurd.  "Will you meet us on shore?"

"It will be better so," replied Ulf.  "I will get the 'Otter' farther
out before nightfall, and will wait for you opposite here with a
small boat."

With a parting handshake Sigurd slipped over the side again, and
rowed slowly through the shipping on his way back.  As he passed a
large ship, he saw that the sailors were making a clumsy effort to
raise the sail.  Indeed, from their looks he took them for newly
raised levies from the country on their way to join Hakon, as the
ship was a war vessel.  He rested a moment, watching them with a
smile; then it died away as he saw an officer, whose back was turned
toward him, standing directly beneath the heavy spar that the men
were hoisting.

"He'd better look out," thought Sigurd, "if those fellows lost their
grip on the rope--ah, I thought so!"

For, even as the thought flashed through his mind, the rope had
slipped loose from the men, and the yard fell, striking the officer a
glancing blow and knocking him overboard.

With a shout Sigurd drove his oars into the water and reached the
place where the man had gone down before the confused men on the ship
could put out a boat.  He could see nothing of the man, so, quickly
throwing off his fur cap and cloak and unbuckling his sword-belt,
Sigurd took a long breath and dived from the boat's side.

For an instant the ice-cold water paralyzed him; then, opening his
eyes, the boy struck down.  There, just beneath him, was the
senseless face of--Thorkel Leira!

Sigurd checked his stroke.  Why not leave this traitor and villain to
his fate, so richly deserved?  Why risk his own life for that of a
worthless fellow such as Thorkel?  But he only hesitated an instant;
hastily gripping the man's hair, he made for the surface.

Although Sigurd was a good swimmer, he reached the air with a great
sigh of relief, for he had been under water nearly a minute, and the
water was too cold for comfort.  Thorkel had been struck senseless
and made no resistance.

As he emerged, a shout sounded in his ear, and there beside him was a
small boat.  His own skiff was not far, and after the men at his side
hauled up Thorkel, he struck out for his own boat.  Sigurd realized
only too well that he did not want to be questioned, for any mishap
now would ruin their plans of escape; so, paying no heed to the
shouts of the Norsemen, he clambered over the stern of his craft,
donned his fur coat hastily, and made for the shore.

He pulled up the boat and made off at once.  His dripping clothes had
already frozen, and the cloak hid most of them, so that he regained
the hall without question.  As he entered his room, Vagn greeted him
with a cry of amazement when he threw off the cloak.

"What on earth--" he began, but Sigurd interrupted with a laugh.

"Water, rather, Vagn.  Help me get these wet things off first."

Jarl Hakon had sent them a goodly supply of garments, and when Sigurd
had changed to dry clothes he recounted the adventure to his cousin.

"Good for you, old man!" cried Vagn, as he finished.  "I don't think
that I would have resisted the temptation to let him drown and get
rid of the wretch.  Did any recognize you?"

Sigurd shook his head.  "I got away too quickly, and Thorkel was
senseless.  The yard struck him on the shoulder, so I suppose he
wasn't very badly hurt.  Don't say anything to Astrid about it."

"Why not?" asked Vagn, in surprise.

"Well," Sigurd hesitated, "she would make a fuss about it, and--well,
I really wish you wouldn't, old fellow!"

Seeing that Sigurd really wished it so, Vagn agreed, and they went to
Astrid's room to tell her of their plans with Ulf.

Astrid greeted them with a laugh.  "You changed pretty quickly,
Sigurd," she said.

"Why, what do you mean?"  Both boys stared at her.

"Oh, one of my maids just ran in and told me how some yellow-haired
stranger rescued our old friend Thorkel down in the harbor, and ran
off before they could find out who he was.  So I knew that it must be
Fairhair, here!"

"So it was, Astrid!" cried out Vagn.  "If I'd been there I would have
let the scoundrel drown!"

"No you wouldn't, Vagn," protested Sigurd.  "You might kill him in
fair fight, but you wouldn't let him drown without trying to save
him!"

"Never mind," declared Astrid, looking at Sigurd, "it was a noble
thing to do, Fairhair, and I am proud of you for it."

Sigurd blushed rosily, and hastily turned the conversation by
describing his meeting with Ulf.

"By the way," added Vagn, "I found out something.  At night our doors
are locked and a man sleeps outside in the hall, before them.  Hakon
must think we are worth keeping!"

Sigurd thought it over.  "The only way I can see is to entice our
guard inside and tie him up, then go to Astrid's room and seize her
guard before he can cry out.  Any way, Astrid, be ready on the second
night from this, about midnight, and we will get you somehow."

"We had best not be seen together in the meantime," cautioned the
girl, "or someone may become suspicious."

Vagn nodded.  "That's right.  Well, we won't see you till we come for
you, then!"

"All right," laughed Astrid, as they left.  "Good-by, till then!"




CHAPTER V.

THE ESCAPE FROM THRANDHEIM.

That night the two boys watched, and discovered that their guard was
changed at midnight, so they decided to make the attempt as soon as
the guards were changed, as this would give them more time to get
away safely.

The two succeeding days passed slowly, and the boys spent them in
wandering about the town.  They excited no attention, as in the
harbor were one or two Danish ships, a vessel from England, and
another from Iceland, both of the latter being trading ships
wintering in Norway.  Sigurd could not repress a shudder as once they
passed the gloomy temple of Thor.

"When will these people ever become Christian?" he said to his
cousin, as they gazed at the massive stone portal.  "Should we really
conquer Norway, let our first deed be to tear down this blood-stained
old place, and erect in its stead a temple to Christ!"

"Aye," corrected Vagn.  "'If!'  A vow is an easy thing, Fairhair, to
make, but a hard one to fulfill.  Norway has many chiefs as noble as
Jarl Hakon, and no country can be conquered against its will while
there is one to lead the people against the invader.  King Svein, or
his son Canute, may well take England, for Ethelred is a cruel and
hated king; but I misdoubt that we shall ever come to Thrandheim as
conquerors."

On the second evening, when Harald came to lock them in their room,
he grumbled, "If it were not for you two, I would be with the Jarls
now.  It will soon be all up with your Jomsborgers now!"

"Why, what do you mean?" cried Vagn.  "Eirik hasn't come here yet!"

"Nor will he," rejoined Harald, as he shot the bolt.  "He passed
outside the Firth to-day with sixty ships, and will join his father
by to-morrow night at More."

"How many ships will both Jarls have?" called out Sigurd.

The man paused in the hallway.  "Close onto two hundred, for Hakon
took seventy-four south with him, and he will collect as many more in
the south."

As the man's steps died away the two boys stared at each other in
dismal silence.

"Too late, Sigurd!"  Vagn's voice broke.

"Not yet," contended Sigurd, stoutly.  "Ulf said that the 'Otter' was
fast enough to pass Eirik, and besides, our own fleet may not have
come so far north yet.  Never give up!"

"That's true," granted Vagn, "for the men will probably want to land
and plunder.  Well, there may be hope yet."

They stood watch and watch until midnight; then, after the relieved
guard had retired, Vagn nudged Sigurd and the latter emitted a long,
dismal groan.

At the second groan the man outside stirred; at the third he undid
the bolts, and said, "Here, what's wrong?  Are you sick?"

Sigurd groaned again, muttering something, and the man entered.  As
he did so, Vagn threw his cloak over his head while Sigurd sprang at
him.  For an instant he struggled furiously, but the cloak stifled
him, and soon he was lying bound on the floor, while the boys darted
off down the hall.

Silently they made their way down to the women's quarters, meeting no
one.  The man before Astrid's door was half asleep, and they secured
him with only a slight struggle.  As they did so, the door opened and
the girl came out, a dark cloak over her kirtle.

"Good!" she whispered, as she saw the man lying bound.  "I'm all
ready."

They gained the street without mishap, and ran at top speed down the
hill to the harbor, without meeting a person.  Arriving at the
waterside, they found the "Otter's" boat awaiting them, with Ulf
himself on the shore, wrapped in a cloak.

As they rowed out to the ship, Vagn told Ulf how they had escaped,
and as they reached the "Otter," Ulf leaped on deck, crying in a low
tone, "All ready men!  Slip the cable and out oars."

The oars, already muffled, were run out, and the men soon made the
"Otter" move briskly through the water, the faint starlight serving
to guide them through the shipping.  A little later they gained the
open Firth, and the huge square sail was hoisted.  They were at last
on their way home!

"Well, that is the last I will see of Thrandheim for many a day."
declared Ulf, as they watched the shores flit by.  "It will not
matter much, though.  There is little to be gained in trading from
this country, and next voyage I think I will go to England or
Flanders.  Now, don't you want to turn in?  I have made the cabin
ready for the Lady Astrid, and I suppose that you can turn in with
the men, as I will."

By morning they were well down the coast, and as the "Otter" was a
notably fast ship, Ulf had no fear of pursuit.  All day they sailed
south, and at evening the ship's prow was turned out to sea.

"Eirik's fleet passed down yesterday afternoon," explained Ulf, "and
we do not want to run into them.  If the wind holds fair we will be
nearly opposite Hiorunga Firth by morning, and will turn in to the
coast then."

When the boys wakened in the morning they saw that the "Otter" was
indeed heading east, but a thick fog lay over the sea and the wind
had dropped, the "Otter" being propelled by her oars.

"We are near the coast," declared Ulf, "and as the sun must be just
rising this fog will blow away before long."

Suddenly, as they forged slowly ahead, the helmsman hailed Ulf, who
sprang into the forecastle.

"Come hither, friends," he called to the boys, and pointing ahead,
"what is that yonder?"

There, ahead of them, it seemed as though many lights were burning
dimly through the mist.  For a few minutes they gazed, puzzled; then
Vagn gave a cry.

"Turn her prow, quickly!" he shouted to the helmsman.  "Those are not
fires at all!  That is a fleet yonder, and the fog where they are
must have cleared off, so that the sun shines on the gilded
dragon-prows!  That is what we see!"

It was too late, however, for a few minutes later the fog cleared off
around them, and not a mile away they saw the high cliffs of Norway;
while, farther off, gleamed the white sails of a great fleet of ships.

"Which fleet is it?" cried Sigurd, his heart leaping.

"I know not," responded Ulf.  "We must run in and take our chance.
If the worst comes to the worst, we can outrun them, for the wind is
coming up strongly.  Now for breakfast."

They ate a hurried meal, while the "Otter" plowed on swiftly through
the waves.  At the end of an hour Vagn, who was watching from the
forecastle, cried out in joy.  "It is our own fleet!  I see a sail
with a red cross!"

"That is Hiorunga Firth, there to the north," declared Ulf, as Astrid
joined them in the prow.  "See, the fleet is heading in toward it,
and we may be in time yet, for we will be up with them in half an
hour."

In less than that space of time, indeed, they had come so near that
they could make out the individual ships, and as they all knew Jarl
Sigvald's ship by sight, Ulf steered toward that division.

[Illustration: _As they all knew Jarl Sigvald'a ship by sight, Ulf
steered toward that division._]

What a sight it was!  Ship after ship, with their gayly painted sails
and glittering prows, in the shape of birds and beasts, all crowded
with armed men, while, far ahead, shone the sails of more.

"That looks strange, Vagn," said Sigurd, uneasily.  "I do not see any
of my father's ships; it must be that he has pressed ahead, and may
fall into Sigvald's trap!"

A few minutes later the nearest ship hailed them, and as the
Jomsvikings recognized Vagn and Sigurd a mighty shout went up, which
rolled from ship to ship as the news spread through the fleet, and
amid a roar of war-horns and clashing of arms, the "Otter" drew up to
the ship of Jarl Sigvald, the oars being hastily drawn in, and Vagn
leaped aboard, followed closely by Sigurd.

Sigvald was overjoyed at their escape, but there was no time for
telling the story now.  Vagn swiftly described the plot of Jarl
Hakon, and a yell of rage arose from the men who had crowded around.
It was echoed from the other ships, who had drawn in, as the helmsman
shouted out the tidings.

"We have no time to lose, then," cried Sigvald, "for Bui has gone
ahead and has landed men to plunder."  He turned to the "Otter."
"Ulf," he shouted, "keep the Lady Astrid on board, and wait for three
days at the midmost of the Herey Isles, a mile or two south.  If you
hear no news of us by then, fly with all speed to King Svein."

Ulf waved his hand, and with a last good-by the boys parted from
Astrid as the ships were cast asunder.

"I will put you on board your ship," exclaimed Sigvald to Vagn, "as
we go.  Up sail!  Out oars!"  He seized his great war-horn and blew a
mighty blast.  The men sprang to their places, and as they passed
through the fleet cheer after cheer went up for the plucky boys who
had brought the news.  Hastily sails arose again and blades flashed
out in the morning sun, for Bui, who had landed ahead of the fleet
near Hod Island, must be warned at once.

They drew alongside Vagn's ship, and the two boys sprang on board.
Vagn's men, who had followed his father and grandfather in many a
hard fray, went wild at the sight of him, and greeted Sigurd no less
heartily.  But Fairhair was worried about his father, who he knew was
over-rash, and suddenly he heard the helmsman give a great cry of
dismay, and saw him wave his arms.

"What is it?" he cried, as he dashed up the ladder, followed by Vagn.
But there was no need of words.  There, cutting swiftly around the
end of Hod Island toward Hiorunga Bay, was the division of Bui, in
mad haste.  He had fallen into the trap!




CHAPTER VI.

HIORUNGA BAY.

"Forward!"  Jarl Sigvald's war-horn rang out its command, and the
fleet pressed on to support their rash chief.  Sigurd gave a groan of
dismay, but Vagn encouraged him.

"He won't be taken, Fairhair, but will return when he sees the trap.
Nevertheless, we have fallen into it, for Sigvald cannot back out now
with honor; we must go forward and fight like Jomsborg men!"

Bui's ships disappeared around the north end of Hod Island; then, as
Sigvald got his fleet into battle array, with each half-dozen ships
lashed side by side, they came back into sight, with lowered sails
and oars lashing the waters to spray.

The ship of Bui was the first to reach the fleet, and as he stood in
the forecastle and shouted of his discovery, Sigvald checked him, and
ordered him to form his battle-line behind the fleet.  Bui rowed past
Vagn's ship, and as he did so Sigurd sprang on the rail, with a shout.

There was no time for stopping, so his father only waved his hand in
passing, and called out, in joy and surprise, "Skoal, Sigurd!  Use
your best weapons to-day!" It was the last word Sigurd ever had with
his father, Bui of Bornholm.

As the fleet moved forward slowly, one by one the ships of Bui
straggled back and formed behind Sigvald's line.  The Jomsborg men
might have fled still, but they scorned to do that, and it was
against their laws.  The day was clouding up now, and as they turned
the headland into the bay, the wind suddenly changed and blew dead
against them--and there, moving on them, lay the Norse fleet!

Spreading out like a great crescent, glittering with oars and steel,
Hakon's fleet moved forward, while Sigvald broke his array into three
parts.  Vagn Akison, by virtue of his father's place and his own
renown, commanded a third part of the ships; beside his vessels lay
those of Bui, while Sigvald commanded the last twenty.

"Look, Vagn!" cried Sigurd, as they watched the Norsemen, still a
half-mile distant, "they are breaking up likewise!"

"Yes," replied Vagn bitterly, "but there must be nearly two hundred
ships there, crowded with men.  That means sixty or seventy against
each of our divisions of twenty!"

Then, leaping into the waist, Vagn distributed the byrnies, or shirts
of woven steel rings, and opened several chests of swords and axes,
so that the men could get at them.  He and Sigurd were fully armed,
and naught remained but to await the attack.

It was not long in coming.  Jarl Hakon's banners were suddenly
raised, with a great burst of war-horns, and a flight of stones and
arrows fell among the Jomsborg ships.  Sigvald's banner was run up
likewise, and his men replied, but the Norsemen had the advantage,
for the wind was with them, and fast rising to a gale.  Nevertheless,
the Jomsvikings shot well, and occasioned great confusion among their
foes, for their long, sharp shafts pierced shield, byrnie and body.

As the two fleets drew together, most of the bows were flung aside,
and the spear-racks were emptied.  Sigurd and Vagn, standing on the
high forecastle with their chosen men, plied their weapons fast; but
a minute later, with a crash that nearly threw them to the deck, the
fleets came together.

"Concentrate on the ship against us!" shouted Sigurd, and a hail of
spears poured into the large ship whose prow ground into that of
Vagn's.  The Norsemen strove to board, but a terrible burst of
weapons met them, and an instant later Sigurd gave a cry of joy.

"Hurrah!  We will win yet!"  Vagn echoed the cry, for their attacker
was slowly withdrawing.

"Cast a grapnel on them!" ordered Vagn, and as the Norse ship was
secured he leaped into her, followed by Sigurd and his forecastle
men.  The Norsemen gave way, but as the Jomsvikings pressed forward a
new burst of horns arose, and into the press sailed a dozen fresh
ships.

"Back for your lives!" called Sigurd, as he saw a crowd of the enemy
pouring aboard.  "Back to our ship!"

They could see nothing of the battle on either hand, for they were
surrounded by the Norse ships; but as they gained the deck of their
own vessel they heard a wild shout from Bui's ships, and again the
Norse line shrank backward.  As Sigurd looked around, he saw Jarl
Hakon's ship just behind their own.

"Look there, Vagn!  Order the men to turn their spears on Hakon!"

Vagn did so, and a storm of spears and arrows poured upon the Jarl's
ship.  He stood proudly in the forecastle, and for a moment the rain
of weapons almost hid him; then he reappeared, smiling, but his armor
was ripped to pieces, and he shook himself free of it.

Now a fresh burst of foemen bore down on Vagn's division, and only
the higher sides of the vikings' ships saved them.  Men were falling
fast, but as yet the vikings had not suffered nearly so much as had
the enemy.  The fighting had not yet become hand to hand, and in the
thickly crowded Norse ships not a Jomsborg spear failed of its mark,
and the trained skill of the vikings told heavily against the
unskilled levies of Hakon.

Suddenly Sigurd laughed, and staggered.  "What means the laugh,
Fairhair?" called Vagn, who was directing his men in the waist.

"An arrow, but in the arm only," replied Sigurd.  A shaft had pierced
his arm, just above the elbow, but he snapped off the barb and drew
it through the wound, and continued fighting.  The next moment,
however, another arrow flew past his head and was buried in the rail
behind him; a third followed it, glancing from his helmet.

Sigurd realized that someone was aiming at him steadily, and marking
the direction from which the arrows came, he saw the face of Thorkel
Leira in one of the ships below.  The man was just aiming a fourth
shaft, half covered by the shield of a follower.

Catching the arrow on his shield, Sigurd flung a spear in reply, with
all his force.  The weapon struck full on the shield that covered
Thorkel, pierced it, and Thorkel staggered back.  A fresh attack drew
Sigurd's attention, however, and when he looked for Thorkel again,
his ship had withdrawn.  Now there happened a strange and terrible
thing.

The day had steadily grown darker, with a rising wind.  Suddenly a
blaze of lightning fell athwart the sky, and Jarl Hakon's ship stood
forth in the sight of all, wrapped in lambent flame, the Jarl himself
standing triumphantly in the stern, grasping a hammer like that of
Thor.

A cry of horror arose from the Jomsvikings, who took the figure for
that of the war god; and the lightning was followed by a thick hail,
the stones as large as eggs, which burst full in the faces of the
Jomsborg men.

"Thor with us!  The gods fight for us!"  An exultant shout pealed
upward from the Norse host, who pressed onward with renewed vigor.
All at once a cry broke from Vagn, a cry of anger and dismay.

"Sigurd!  Look yonder!"

There behind them Jarl Sigvald had cut the lashings of his ships and
was fleeing!  The Jomsborg men seemed wild with terror, for now they
thought that Hakon was right, that Thor and Odin were in truth
fighting for him, and they lost heart.

Sigvald's ship cut through the press close behind that of Vagn, and
as it passed the boy called out:

"Sigvald!  Turn and fight!  Turn and fight!"

But Sigvald only urged his men to greater efforts, and the sail was
run up.  At this Vagn seized a spear from the deck, and with a curse
hurled it at the fleeing Jarl.  The spear missed him, but struck down
the helmsman at his side, and the ship was gone from sight in a
moment.

Louder and louder pealed the war-horns of Hakon, as ship after ship
followed Sigvald in his flight.  Vagn's men gave one angry yell, then
fought on in silence.  Presently their attackers drew back for
breathing-space, and as they did so the boys saw Bui's ships close at
hand.

Bui was without hope, but he was true to his vows, and fought on
stoutly.  The Norse ships gave way before his onset, and with a shout
of triumph Bui's men cut their lashings to pursue.  It was a fatal
error; for even as they did so fresh Norse ships drove down on them,
broke their solid front, surrounded them and began to pour in
boarders.

Sigurd, watching helplessly, saw the Norsemen sweep aboard and slowly
clear the deck; Bui retreated to the forecastle with a few of his
men, but he was surrounded now, and his foes closed in.  The old
warrior fought on steadily; Sigurd caught a glimpse of his father in
single combat with a gigantic Norseman, wielding an axe.  Bui
slipped, and the axe whirled above him and fell on his helmet,
wounding him terribly; but recovering, Bui cut down his foe, then
leaped to the rail.

"Overboard, all Bui's men!" rang out his voice, loudly.  Just then
the fight closed in on Vagn afresh, but Sigurd caught a flash of
armor, and knew that his father had died as a viking should, beneath
the waves.

The Jomsborg ships broke up now, each fighting desperately to the
last.  One by one they were boarded and swept clean of men, and at
length it came the turn of Vagn's ship.

Then, as the Norsemen swept over the side, the vikings put sword and
axe in play for the first time, the boys at their head.  Time after
time the flood poured across the bulwarks, and time after time the
Jomsborg steel stemmed the tide and drove it back.  At last a wild
yell arose behind them, and those of the crew who were left retreated
slowly to the forecastle, fighting desperately.

A very handsome man, of lofty stature, swept over the prow with his
men, and cut his way to Vagn.  The two met with a clash of swords,
and the tall man, evidently a leader of note, fell beneath Vagn's
blows; he was up again, however, and his men swiftly closed around
Vagn.  Sigurd gave a shout of rage, and sprang to his friend's side,
but too late.

The sea of fierce faces swept down on him, but recoiled before the
Jomsborg axes.  Vagn lay motionless, and Sigurd, bestriding his body,
faced the handsome leader, axe in hand.  The other's sword flashed,
and for a moment Sigurd was hard put to it to ward off the storm of
blows; then his axe fell on the other's helm, and the man staggered
back.  Before he could follow up his advantage, Sigurd slipped in a
pool of blood--he saw a sword whirled above him, gave his battle-cry
once more--and sank across the body of Vagn.

With the fall of Vagn and Sigurd, the battle was over.  Thirty-five
ships had fled with Sigvald, twenty-five had remained with Bui and
Vagn.  One by one they were boarded and cleared, for Jarl Hakon gave
no quarter; one by one they floated out of the whirl, empty but for
dying and dead.  The vikings died beneath sword and spear, or
followed Bui's example and plunged beneath the waves, while far in
the distance the white sails of Sigvald glittered awhile and then
vanished to the south.




CHAPTER VII.

HOW VAGN KEPT HIS VOW.

"That is all, I think; twenty of them.  No, this one stirred
somewhat.  Here, lift him up."

Sigurd opened his eyes.  Over him were bending two men, one his
handsome opponent, the other--Thorkel Leira.  The boy struggled to
his feet, the former assisting.

It was only mid-afternoon, the storm had passed, and about the
Jomsborg ships lay the Norse fleet.  Glancing around, Sigurd saw the
decks heaped with dead, and in the waist of the ship was a little
group of Jomsvikings, their arms bound.  Then he remembered Vagn.

Thorkel Leira was holding a horn of water to Vagn's lips, and as
Sigurd, weak and dizzy, knelt at his friend's side, he wondered why
Thorkel thus aided his deadly enemy.  He was soon to know.

Vagn looked up.  As he caught sight of Thorkel he dashed the horn
aside and struggled up on Sigurd's arm.  Before he could speak,
however, a group of men approached and bound the boys' arms, under
the orders of the handsome chief.  Then they were led into the waist
of the ship and joined the others.

The men gave a murmur of joy.  "It was a noble fight, eh, Vagn?"
muttered an old viking, Biorn of Bretland, or Wales.  "I have fought
for twenty years under your father Aki and your grandfather
Palnatoki, and I never saw a greater battle than this."

"It is a sad one for the brotherhood, Biorn," replied Vagn weakly,
"when the Jarl himself turned tail and fled."

A murmur of anger ran around the group, then Sigurd asked, "Who is
the tall man, and what will they do with us?"

Biorn nodded toward some small boats near by.  "They are taking us on
shore, I know not why.  Neither do I know the man."

A group of Norsemen approached, and the captives were led to the
boats, which were swiftly rowed to the shore.  Here, upon a long
fallen tree, sat the Jomsborg men, with their feet bound in a long
rope; but their hands were left free.

The Norsemen surrounded them, binding up wounds, exchanging rough
jests on the battle, and examining with awe and wonder these vikings
whose name was so famous, and who had fought so stoutly against such
great odds.

Presently the tall man and Thorkel Leira landed.  "I have it,
Sigurd!" cried Vagn.  "That handsome man must be Jarl Eirik, Hakon's
son!"

At that instant the handsome man came up to the captives.

"You fought well and stoutly, Jomsvikings," he said, "and I am in
truth sorry that Jarl Hakon has ordered that no quarter be given, for
I would fain spare your lives if I might."

"It is the fortune of war," replied Vagn, smiling bravely.  "Had we
conquered, I do not think that Sigvald would have spared Hakon
either, yet Christian men have more merciful customs than you who
follow Thor and Odin."

The other flushed slightly, turning to Thorkel.  "It is not to my
taste, Thorkel, to slay these helpless men thus."

Thorkel smiled his cunning, cruel smile.  "It is much to my taste,
Jarl, to slay Vagn Akison!"

At this Vagn cried out, "Yet you feared to stand before me in battle,
Thorkel!  Say, will you loose my bonds and meet me now with sword or
axe?"

A murmur of assent arose from the Norsemen who stood around, but
Thorkel shook his head, as he fingered the big axe in his hand.

As Thorkel withdrew to speak with the handsome man for a moment, old
Biorn leaned over and whispered excitedly to Sigurd: "It is just a
chance, Fairhair, so try it."

Sigurd nodded as Thorkel returned.  "Best begin with the chiefs,
Thorkel," he cried, although his heart beat madly, for if Biorn's
plan did not work nothing could save his life.  Thorkel advanced and
stood in front of him.

"Since you are in haste to die, let it be so."

"Wait!" exclaimed Sigurd, as the man swung his axe aloft.  "Let
someone hold my hair, lest it be defiled and soiled."

A Norseman, with a word of admiration at the lad's bravery, stepped
forward and gathered up the boy's long, fair hair in his hands, and
the axe swung.

As it descended, Sigurd jerked his body so strongly to one side that
the axe was buried in the earth, and Thorkel lost his balance and
fell forward.  A laugh went up from the crowd as the angry man rose,
but the handsome chief advanced and held his arm.

"Who are you, handsome lad?"

"I am called Sigurd, and am Bui's son," replied Sigurd, looking up to
the other's eyes, which met his in admiration.  "The Jomsborg men are
not yet all dead!"

"Truly you are a son of Bui!" exclaimed the other.  "Will you take
life and peace from me?"

"If you have the power to give it," answered Sigurd.

The man drew himself up.  "He offers who has power to give--Jarl
Eirik Hakonson."

"Thanks, Jarl," replied Sigurd, with a breath of relief, "I will
accept it."  The whisper of old Biorn had proved true.

Thorkel, with a dark frown, plucked up his axe, and cried angrily,
"Though you spare all these men, Eirik, Vagn shall not escape me!"

With that he raised the axe.  As the weapon whirled, Biorn flung
himself against Thorkel's knees.  The man stumbled, the axe fell; and
Vagn, springing up in a flash, seized it and fulfilled his vow.

A great shout of applause rang out, for above all things Norsemen
love a brave deed.  They crowded around admiringly, and Jarl Eirik
with a smile, said, "Will you also take life, Vagn?"

"That I will," answered Vagn, "if you will also give it to my men as
well."

"Loose them from the rope," commanded the Jarl, and it was done.

By this time evening was coming on, and the Norsemen hastily made a
camp on the shore; Jarl Hakon was encamped across the bay.  The men
sat around the fires and talked in low tones, and presently the two
boys were summoned to the fire of the Jarl.

Eirik greeted them with a winning smile.  "Sit down and eat, friends,
for I have somewhat to think over.  My father gave express commands
that no Jomsviking was to be spared; why I gave you life I know not,
save that you were but boys, and full of courage.  Now, whither would
you go?"

Vagn looked at Sigurd.  The latter nodded, and Vagn told Eirik the
story of Ulf and Astrid, who were waiting a few miles away.  When he
finished the Jarl sat in thought for a moment.

"Here is my counsel.  If I send you both off together, my father will
send a ship after you to slay you, and I will not have my promise
broken.  I go home from here by land to the mountains, and so to my
own earldom.  I would advise that you, Vagn, come with me, for I can
protect you, and let Sigurd rejoin Ulf with the eighteen Jomsvikings
who are left.  I will send you home, Vagn, within a month at most."

"That is a good plan," exclaimed Vagn.  "Do you not think so,
Fairhair?"

Sigurd assented, though he disliked to part with his cousin; but
there was no help for it, and so it was decided.

Early the next morning the Jomsborg men and Sigurd ran out three
small boats and said farewell to Vagn.  Eirik armed them all well,
and made them many presents; and as they pushed off Vagn stood on the
shore, waving farewell.

"I'll see you at Jomsborg next month," called Sigurd.  "Farewell!"

Under a fair wind the three boats ran quickly down the bay, rounded
the end of Hod Island, and arrived in an hour at the Herey Islands.
Steering in between the largest and smallest, they reached into the
bay, and there before them lay the "Otter."

A shout of greeting came to them, and as they pulled up to the side
Ulf Ringsson sprang on the rail.

"What news of the battle?  Who won?"

Sigurd pointed to his men, all of them wounded.  "These are all left
of the Jomsvikings," he replied.  A cry of horror went up, and Ulf
staggered back.

"Impossible!  Where is your father Bui, Jarl Sigvald, Vagn Akison,
Aslak Holmskalle?  They cannot be dead!"

"Some are even worse off," said Sigurd, climbing the rail wearily.
"Vagn is safe, my father is dead with Aslak, and Sigvald and his men
have fled home again."

While Astrid greeted Sigurd, and his wounded and weary men clambered
on board, Ulf remained stunned with amazement.  "Fled!  Fled!" he
muttered.  "The Jarl himself false to his vows!"

He could not believe it; for it was the most sacred law of Jomsborg
that no viking should turn his back to a foe.  Sigurd told of the
fight, while the excited sailors questioned his men, and as he
finished Astrid sprang forward.

"You are wounded, Sigurd!  See, your arm is all red, and your head is
bloody!"

"Yes, bind it up," laughed Sigurd bitterly, "for the Jomsborg rules
are shattered with the brotherhood forever!"  Then he reeled, and
would have fallen save for the strong hand of Ulf.

They carried him to the cabin, and while the men set sail, Ulf, who
was skilled as a leech, extracted the broken arrow-head and bound up
the wound.  The other, on his head, was not dangerous, and Sigurd
soon fell into a deep sleep, not waking till the afternoon.

The rocking of the ship told him that they were out at sea, so he
hastened on deck; to his surprise, the land was out of sight, and a
heavy gale was blowing.

"So you are awake!" cried Astrid.  "How do you feel?"

"Ready for another battle," laughed Sigurd, then his brow clouded
over as he thought of his father.  Astrid, divining his thoughts, was
silent for a moment, then changed the subject.

"We had no sooner left the land than this gale broke on us, and Ulf
says that it is growing stronger every minute."

Sigurd looked around.  Indeed, the gale was a heavy northeaster, and
now he noticed that the sail was close-reefed, and that everything
was stowed away save the three boats in which he had come to the
"Otter," which were lashed securely in the shelter of the high stern.

"Hello, I'm glad to see you around so soon!" cried Ulf cheerily, and
the boy gripped his hand in thanks.

"If Jarl Hakon were here, Ulf, he would say that Ran, the ocean
queen, was trying to complete the work begun by Thor and Odin at
Hiorunga Bay."

Sigurd smiled at Astrid, but the captain looked about anxiously.

"We are in for a bad blow, Sigurd.  It is good that the 'Otter' is
stanch, for to tell you the truth, we are far from our course for
Denmark, and it may well be that we shall be driven farther still."




CHAPTER VIII.

"SKOAL, TO KING OLAF!"

Much as they loved the keen wind and dash of the spray, Sigurd and
Astrid were soon driven from their post in the bow of the "Otter,"
for the seas began rolling up tremendously, and they were forced to
seek the shelter of the cabin.  The men were all stowed away below,
save for the watch on duty, and as the "Otter" was a stanch vessel,
and Ulf a good captain, Sigurd had no fear but that they would
outride the storm safely.

"How strange it all seems!" remarked Astrid that evening.  "Only a
few short weeks ago we were all together at the heir-ship feast of my
uncle, and now the Jomsborg power is shattered, Vagn is far off in
Norway, and here we are driving no one knows where, over the sea!  I
wonder what became of your falcon!"

Sigurd laughed.  "I wonder what!  Never mind, we will soon be back
again with good Queen Gunhild.  Hello! how goes it, Ulf?"

[Illustration: "_Never mind, we will soon be back again with good
Queen Gunhild._"]

The captain entered, dripping with brine, and shook his head.
"Badly, Sigurd.  It is fully the worst storm I ever saw, and I was a
fool for ever putting to sea at this time of year.  However, we must
trust in God and do our best to weather it."

So for five days the "Otter" scudded before the gale, utterly
helpless.  There was plenty of work for all, however, for the giant
seas swept the low hull repeatedly, and everyone was kept busy
bailing the ship, from morning to night.  It was lucky, indeed, that
the eighteen Jomsvikings had come aboard with Sigurd, for as it was
all were so exhausted by the constant labor that they worked
mechanically, and at the end of every watch they lashed themselves to
the bulwarks and dropped to sleep at once.

On the fifth evening Sigurd was sitting in the cabin, talking to
Astrid, when they were startled by a loud crash, followed by shouts
and cries.  Sigurd ran out on deck.

"The mast!" shouted Ulf in his ear.  Sigurd turned and saw only a
ragged stump.  Ulf motioned him inside, for the gale blew all words
away, and when the door was closed cried in despair.

"Sigurd, I have done my best!  Had the mast held we would have been
safe, for the storm is breaking, I think; but an hour since I saw
land in the west, and we cannot beat off now."

"Know you what land it was?" inquired Astrid.  Ulf shook his head
despondently.

"For aught I know, it may be Scotland, or the Fareys, or the Orkneys,
or even that Vinland which the Icelanders say Eirik the Red
discovered.  I am lost, and we are in the hands of God."

Presently Ulf went out again, and managed to rig enough canvas to the
stump of the mast to keep the "Otter's" head before the wind.  In
this fashion they drove ahead all night, and with daybreak a long
line of cliffs was disclosed, straight ahead, and only a few miles
away.

As they stood watching on the forecastle, Astrid pulled at Sigurd's
arm.  "Why can't we escape in those boats, when the 'Otter' drives
ashore?" she shouted in his ear, pointing to the three boats lashed
in the stern.  This had not occurred to Sigurd or Ulf, because the
viking ships themselves were so small that they rarely carried boats,
as they could be drawn up on shore easily enough.

"Hurrah!  Good idea, Astrid!" Sigurd hastened to Ulf's side, but the
latter shrugged his shoulders at the plan.

"To what end?  We will only be putting off death for a few minutes;
once we drive on those cliffs and it will be over."

Nevertheless, at Sigurd's urging the boats were made ready, for
although the storm was breaking they were fast nearing the shore.
Into each boat were put arms and food, well secured.

"We must leave before she strikes," shouted Ulf, "else the seas will
sweep boats and all away."

Sigurd nodded, and returned to Astrid.  The cliffs were not a mile
away now, and they could see the white spray flying high from the
dark rocks.  Presently Ulf motioned to them, and they descended into
the waist of the ship, joining the crowd about the boats.  Sigurd
took command of one, Ulf of another, and Biorn of Bretland commanded
the third; then all awaited the word.  The "Otter" was low in the
water now, and it would be no great task to launch the boats over her
side.

Presently Ulf gave a sharp command.  "Out!"  The six men assigned to
each boat lifted it, poised it an instant on the rail, then as a
giant crest foamed along the three boats were borne out together.  A
man leaped in each, and fended off from the "Otter's" side with a
spear, while the rest hastily embarked.

"Farewell, old Otter!" cried Ulf, the last to leave; and as they
swept from the vessel they saw her suddenly lurch and reel wildly.

"Just in time!" said Sigurd to Astrid, who was in his boat.  "She
struck then, but scraped over; next time--"

While he was speaking, the ship heeled far over on her side, amid a
cloud of flying foam; but they could not watch her further, for now
they were fighting for their own lives.  Sigurd was at the tiller,
and he followed Ulf closely, while the men rowed steadily.  The seas
swept them in under the cliffs, and Ulf suddenly raised his hand and
waved it.  Straight at the high walls his boat darted, and then
Sigurd saw a little stretch of beach before them as he swept in.

With a last stroke the men drove the boats up, then leaped out and
drew them up.  Sigurd carried Astrid up the beach and looked around.
The cliffs did not seem so steep now, and Sigurd realized that they
would be able to climb them, just as Ulf joined him.  The captain was
in more hopeful spirits now.

"Your plan certainly saved us, lady," he exclaimed to Astrid.  "I had
given up hope--strange I did not think of those boats myself.  But we
so seldom use small boats that I never gave them a thought.  Now,
Fairhair, what had we best do?"

Sigurd looked out to sea, where the hull of the "Otter" was fast
breaking up under the smashing blows of the waves.  "Well, I think we
had better take the arms and food from the boats, scale those cliffs,
and see where we are.  We have over a score of well-armed men, and
the folk, whoever they are, will hesitate before molesting us."

Ulf turned and gave the necessary orders, then, followed by Biorn and
the rest, they made for the cliffs.  These, as Sigurd had foreseen,
offered no great difficulties to the Norsemen, who were all used to
climbing about their native fiords, and in half an hour they stood on
the brow and looked about.

Before them lay a heavily wooded country, rolling with small hills
and valleys, but without a sign of habitation.  The storm was nearly
over now, and while the seas still rolled mountain-high below them,
the sun was just breaking through the clouds, and in the distance
they caught the sheen of a river.  The men hailed the sun with a cry
of delight, and Ulf pointed to the river.

"Let us make for that, Sigurd, and there we can have fresh water and
a meal.  After that we can decide what to do."

So, striking away from the sea, they entered the forest.  It was the
end of autumn now, and though the leaves had fallen from many of the
trees, the forest was composed in great part of pines, fresh and
green.  Even Biorn looked puzzled as he tried to make out the country.

"I do not think it is Scotland," he said, "and certainly it is
neither the Fareys nor the Orkneys.  It is not my own land of Wales,
for that was far from our course; it might be Ireland, but I have
never been in that land."

"Ireland!" cried Astrid.  "Why, isn't that where men say Olaf
Tryggveson is king?"

"So it is," rejoined Sigurd, "but it must be a wide land, and we have
small hope of finding Northmen here."

"Well," remarked Ulf, "we can but push on boldly.  If we are indeed
in Ireland, we are lucky, for men say that in that country there is
the finest civilization in Europe--"

"There used to be, Ulf," growled old Biorn, "just as there used to be
in Wales, my own land; but the heathen vikings have well-nigh
destroyed it all."

Soon they come out on the banks of a wide and sluggish river, and
with cries of joy the men rushed down to the bank and plunged in,
drinking greedily and washing the salt brine from their bodies.
Sigurd filled a horn for Astrid, but as she returned it a shout broke
from Biorn:

"Back!  Back!  Out swords, men!"

At the same moment a flight of arrows fell among the men, striking
down two of the sailors, and a wild yell rechoed from the trees.
The Jomsvikings, protected by their byrnies and helmets, hastily
scrambled up the bank and fell into line around the leaders, the
others forming behind them.

Dark forms flitted among the trees, and Sigurd called out, "Shield to
shield, men!  Hold your spears ready for the word."

The vikings' bows were useless, the strings having been soaked, so
they waited helplessly.  Arrows fell thickly, but Sigurd covered
Astrid with his shield, and they did no further harm.  Then, with a
yell, a crowd of men broke out of the forest; they were clad in
woolen tunics, a few wore armor, while all held spears and axes.  As
they charged, Sigurd gave the word.

The attackers broke as the heavy Jomsborg spears sent half a dozen to
the ground; but as they did so a war-horn rang out behind them, and a
voice cried in Norse, "At them, men!  For the Cross!"

Through the forest glades swept a band of steel-clad men, driving the
others before them in headlong flight.  As pursuers and pursued
vanished amid the trees, their leader approached the little band of
shipwrecked men.

Although Sigurd was tall, he noted with surprise that this man was a
good head and shoulders above him, and broad in proportion.  His
features were frank and open, his eyes blue and piercing, and his
hair was red-gold, waving over his golden armor.  He wore a blue
cloak, a gold helm and gold-linked byrnie, and on his shield was a
great cross in red.

"Are you Christian men?" he asked, as he drew near, fixing his eyes
on Sigurd.

"That we are," cried the latter, joyfully.  "Where are we?  Who are
you who rescued us so opportunely?"

"You are on the coast of Ireland, and my city of Dublin is only three
miles distant.  These Irish would never have dared come so near had
they not thought me absent from home on a cruise.  I am Olaf, son of
King Tryggve of Norway."

At this the Jomsvikings gazed in wonder on the handsome chief; then
with a blast on his war-horn old Biorn led the shout:

"Skoal to King Olaf!  Skoal!"




CHAPTER IX.

HOW ASTRID FARED FORTH.

"Thanks, friends!" smiled Olaf, and Sigurd thought that never in all
his life had he seen so handsome and kingly a man.  "Who are you,
young sir?  And who are these men?  Truly, I have seldom beheld so
fine a set of warriors, wounded though they are!"

"I am Sigurd Buisson of Bornholm, King, and with me is Astrid of
Vendland, niece of Gunhild of Denmark.  This is Ulf Ringsson, captain
of our ship, and as for my men, they are the last of the Jomsvikings."

"What!"  Olaf's eyes opened in amazement, and he threw down his
weapons.  "Tell me your tale, quickly!  I heard of Svein's accession
feast, but nothing of what followed.  Has Sigvald, then, won Norway?"

Sigurd told of the battle at Hiorunga Bay, and Olaf's face darkened.
As he concluded, the Norsemen of Olaf returned and all took up the
march for Dublin, Sigurd's men mingling with the others.

While they walked along Olaf told them of how he had fled to Russia
when his father was murdered, how he had become a viking, wandering
the ocean, and how he had been baptized.  Then he had come to Ireland
and won the kingdom of Dublin, ruling it together with his
brother-in-law, Olaf Kvaran.

"We saw your ship from the castle," he explained, "so I came out to
aid any who might escape.  Now, what do you intend doing?"

"As to that," returned Sigurd, "I care little; but the Lady Astrid
here must be returned home."

"Then will you be my man?" inquired Olaf.

"That will I!"  Sigurd turned to his men and called, "Listen,
Jomsvikings!  What say you to taking service with King Olaf?"

"Aye!" the shout went up, with clashing of arms, and Olaf smiled.
"That pleases me well, Sigurd, for a few Jomsborg men are worth a
hundred others.  As to Astrid, she must take her chance; it is too
late in the season for ships now, and I fear she must remain with us
till spring.  However, that can wait; there is the city."

As they left a valley, Dublin lay before them, and the Jomsborg men
cried out in surprise, for the town was very beautiful, and defended
with strong walls and towers such as they had seldom seen.  Soon they
were riding through the streets, and the men were quartered in the
palace, where Olaf also assigned rooms to Ulf, Sigurd and Astrid.

Olaf sent fresh and new garments to all, and soon they rejoined him
in the great hall for the midday meal.  Here Olaf introduced them to
Queen Gyda, his brother-in-law, and one or two of his chief men, and
soon they were all chatting away merrily, forgetful of their past
troubles.

After the meal Sigurd led his Jomsborg men into the hall, up to the
high seat of Olaf.  Kneeling, Sigurd placed his hands between those
of the King, and swore to obey him and to be his man.  One by one the
rest followed his example, and when the ceremony was over Olaf
presented each man with a shield, ornamented with a large red cross;
but to Sigurd he gave a magnificent golden helmet, on top of which
was wrought a dragon in the same metal, its wings outstretched and
sweeping far back.

"I won this helm in Russia," smiled the King, "so see that the dragon
bears his face ever toward my foes!"

Sigurd was overjoyed with the gift, which was a helm worthy a king,
and thanked Olaf most sincerely.  The next day he was given a command
in the court-men, or bodyguard, and took up his new duties.

A week later the first snow fell, but as Astrid had given up all hope
of reaching home before spring, she did not mind greatly.  Indeed,
Olaf's court was a pleasant one, and both Sigurd and Astrid enjoyed
themselves immensely.

Queen Gyda became very fond of Astrid, who was a favorite with all
because of her sunny disposition and gay heart.  Sigurd's wound soon
healed, and by Yuletide both had adjusted themselves to their new
surroundings.

Sigurd grew much attached to King Olaf.  Olaf was high-tempered, but
just, and in warlike exercises no one could equal him.  Often he
would go down to the harbor, bid his men row out a warship, and then
while the oars were out walk along them.  Not content with this, he
would sometimes juggle knives or balls, keeping his balance perfectly.

He took great interest in "Fairhair," for Sigurd's nickname could not
be left behind, and himself added to the store of sword-tricks the
boy had learned in the school at Jomsborg.

Yuletide passed, and a few weeks later a ship drove into the bay, to
the astonishment of everyone, for the ships of that day did not often
venture on voyages in winter.  The new arrivals were from Norway, and
were traders.

It happened that Ulf had not heard of the ship, and as he sat at meat
that evening he leaped to his feet suddenly.

"What is that man who just passed the door?" he exclaimed.  The King
darted a swift, keen look at the captain, and replied:

"That is Thorir Klakke, who arrived to-day from Norway with his
brother Ketil, bearing news and goods for trading."

"Then beware of him, Olaf," remarked Ulf, "for I have often seen him
in deep converse with Jarl Hakon.  He is here for no good, I think."

Shortly after this Thorir and his brother entered.  Both men were
short, dark, and well dressed; but their eyes roved about constantly
beneath their low brows.  Ketil's face in particular was powerful,
yet sullen.

Thorir started slightly at sight of Sigurd, but Olaf greeted him
kindly, and he sat down silently, falling into low converse with his
brother.  For several days nothing occurred, save that Thorir had
frequent audiences with Olaf; but at every meal Sigurd noted Ketil's
gaze fixed on himself or Astrid, although it dropped before that of
Sigurd.  This puzzled him, for he could not see why Ketil should be
interested, and it also angered him, for he saw plainly that Astrid
did not like it.

A week or two after the arrival of the Norsemen, Olaf and Sigurd were
talking together, while Astrid and the Queen were busy with their
sewing.  Suddenly the King exclaimed, abruptly:

"Sigurd, how would you like to visit Norway next summer?"

The boy started, meeting the King's eye eagerly.  "Nothing better, my
lord!"

Olaf smiled.  "Well, Thorir urges me to take the realm of Norway from
Hakon, as is my right.  He says that the bonders are not satisfied
with the Jarl's rule and that it would be an easy task to overthrow
him.  What think you?"

"Well," responded Sigurd, "if Jarl Hakon could overthrow the might of
Jomsborg, methinks it would go hard with others who attempt his
kingdom."

Here Astrid, who had been listening earnestly, broke in: "Perhaps,
King Olaf, Hakon might have sent this man to bring you into his
power!"

Olaf stared at Astrid for a moment, then his blue eyes lit up with a
fierce light, and his fist came down on the table.  "As I am a
Christian man, that is it!  Beware, Thorir Klakke!  If I go to
Norway, it will not be as your master expects!"

"Hakon has sixteen Jarls under him," remarked the Queen, "and some of
them may not be such great friends of his by next fall.  If each
commands one of the districts of the kingdom, you may find an opening
in that way, Olaf."

The King nodded.  "In any case, I will take a strong force.  And when
I do rule Norway, I swear by this sword that I will root out paganism
from the land, and bring the country under the Cross of the white
Christ!  The Hammer of Thor shall vanish from the land!"

For a moment the King's handsome face was stern, and filled with a
high resolve; then it softened again, as he rose and bid Sigurd
good-night.

A few days later the boy felt the bearing of Ketil becoming
intolerable, and he resolved to warn the man to gaze at Astrid less
insolently.  It was his watch upon the walls that night, and as he
was passing through the narrow and dark streets, three men sprang out
on him, from a doorway.  Although taken by surprise, Sigurd put his
back to a wall, and drew his sword.

His light shield cracked and split under the furious blows, although
the men could only attack Sigurd singly, for a doorway on either side
of him afforded some protection.  Knowing that his men were not far,
Sigurd shouted the old Jomsborg call, and at this the three
assailants redoubled their efforts.

Sigurd caught an axe blow on his shield, which sheared it from his
arm; but his sword fell upon the other's shoulder, and with a
muttered curse the axe fell.  Springing out, Sigurd clove the helm of
the second man with one quick stroke, but he received at the same
time a tremendous blow from the sword of the third man.  The boy
staggered, and fell over the body of the man he had killed; and a
loud shout came from the corner, with torches streaming in the lane,
which put the assassins to flight.

The men gave a shout of anger as they saw Sigurd lying in the street,
but the men had escaped, and Biorn raised Sigurd tenderly.  The
latter, thanks to the gift of Olaf, was unhurt, but a dent in the
side of the helmet bore witness to the blow's power.

Biorn turned over the body of the slain man, and the men gave a cry.
"He is one of the crew of Thorir Klakke!  To the King!"

"Stop!" shouted Sigurd as the vikings were rushing off.  "Let this
wait till morning; they cannot escape, and the King dislikes to be
disturbed from his sleep."

They yielded, although unwillingly, and Sigurd took up his guard
again.  This was to be an eventful night, however, for two hours
after midnight one of the harbor guards ran up to him, and cried:

"Sigurd, Thorir Klakke's ship is leaving, and will not answer our
signals; come quickly!"

Calling to Biorn, Sigurd ran down to the harbor, and in the dim light
could see the trading vessel, which had not been drawn up on shore,
slowly making her way toward the harbor entrance, for the port was
too wide to freeze far from shore.

Without wasting time in hailing, Sigurd sprang into a light skiff,
moored at the edge of the ice, set a dozen men at the oars, and in
five minutes was close to the ship.

"Way enough, men," he said, then lifted his voice: "What business
have you leaving Dublin thus?  Come back and give an accounting!"

At this the oars flashed out the faster, and a mocking voice
responded: "What, indeed, young cockerel?  Go back to Jomsborg and--"

"Help, Sigurd!  Help!" broke in a cry, "they have--"

Silence fell again, but something flashed into the water beside
Sigurd's boat, and as Biorn picked it up, the boy exclaimed:

"That was Astrid's voice!  Alongside, men!"

Only a mocking laugh answered, as the square sail rose and the ship
filled away.  "No use," said Biorn.  "Better return; see, I have
picked this up."  He held out something to Sigurd.

Now Sigurd and Astrid both knew the secret of Runic writing, which
only the priests and high chieftains among the Northmen were familiar
with; and looking down at the object, Sigurd saw it was a bit of
wood, with something scratched on it.  The light was too dim to see
further.

"Back to the landing!" cried Sigurd, a terrible fear in his heart.
"Hasten!"

As they drew ashore he leaped out, and held the piece of wood up to
the light of a torch.




CHAPTER X.

FAREWELL TO DUBLIN.

Biorn and the vikings crowded around, as he deciphered the scratches,
for they were unable to read Runic, which was more like shorthand
than anything else.  A cry of dismay burst from Sigurd.

"Listen, men!  'Ketil bears me to England!  Rescue, Sigurd!'  Come,
men, to the palace!"

"To the palace!  To the palace!"  They echoed his words, and the
terrible Jomsborg battle-yell startled the sleeping town, and pealed
up to the castle.

"Bring Thorir Klakke, but harm him not," commanded Sigurd, "while I
arouse the king."

Olaf, however, was already up, wakened by the tumult.  Sword in hand,
he entered the great hall just as Sigurd burst in at the other end.

"What means this uproar?" roared Olaf, his eyes blazing with anger.

"Justice and vengeance, King!" panted Sigurd, as he handed Olaf the
bit of wood.  Sheathing his weapon with a frown, Olaf took the
object, and by the light of the torches read the message.

"What means it?"

"Astrid of Vendland is kidnaped, Olaf, and I was set upon by three
men in the streets.  One I killed, and he was a man of Thorir
Klakke's--stay, here is Thorir now."

Biorn and two vikings entered the hall behind Sigurd, leading the
terrified Thorir.  Olaf, grasping the whole situation, strode up and
thundered in the merchant's ear:

"What means this night's work?  Where is your brother?"

Thorir stammered out, "Indeed, my lord, I know not.  Is he not in his
rooms?"  Then, growing bolder, "Am I accountable for Ketil's doings,
Olaf?  What mean you?"

Olaf looked into the man's eyes a moment, and before that terrible
gaze Thorir squirmed helplessly, but did not weaken.  "Begone to your
rooms!" said the King, contemptuously, and turned abruptly to Sigurd.

"Now tell me the tale in full."

Sigurd told him of the attack, of the flight of the ship, and of
Astrid's cry, in a few words.  "I sent men to her rooms," he
concluded.  "Here they come now."

Close on his words the men entered, with them Queen Gyda and some of
her ladies.  Queen Gyda, who had learned the cause of the tumult from
the vikings, told how a messenger had summoned Astrid an hour before,
saying that Sigurd was hurt in a brawl, and how the girl had run out
hastily.

"Come with me, quickly," ordered the King, and Sigurd followed him to
the ramparts of the castle.  The dawn was just breaking, and far out
at sea they saw a speck of white.

"With Thorir I will deal later, for we have no proof against him as
yet," said the King, "but that man yonder has dishonored me, and
shall die.  Fairhair, take what men you will from my courtmen, and
the 'Crane,' the fastest longship in the harbor.  Ketil has taken his
brother's ship, so you should soon come up with him.  The 'Crane' is
in the water, and is well provisioned; so hasten--be off within the
hour."

"Thanks, Olaf!" replied Sigurd.  "I was about to ask this very thing
of you.  I will take my own men and thirty of yours.  Thanks, for all
your kindness, and above all for your friendship, Olaf!"

The King smiled sadly.  "I have few friends, Sigurd, and methinks you
are the most faithful of them, though the newest.  No, go with God,
and forget him not, for it is still the season of storms."

As Sigurd turned away, the King stopped him with a sudden impulse.

"Stay!  Give me your hands."  Wondering, Sigurd put his hands between
Olaf's.  "Now swear again your oath to me, Jarl Sigurd!"

The boy, overcome by this unexpected title and honor, stumbled
through the oath, and rose with tears in his eyes.

"I need no oath to be faithful, King Olaf!  When you have won Norway,
the title of friend is all I want."

Quick tears sprang to Olaf's eyes also, and unbuckling his
sword-belt, he threw it over Sigurd's shoulders, saying, "I have no
earldoms yet, but here is my Jarl-gift, my friend.  Farewell!"

Sigurd wrung the King's hand, then turned and ran down the stairway
to the courtyard.  Hastily assembling his men, and choosing thirty
from Olaf's followers, he sent them down to the "Crane" with Biorn,
and followed them himself a few minutes later, after bidding Ulf
farewell.  The captain would have accompanied him, but Olaf was
sending him on a mission to an Irish king in the interior.

The "Crane," as Olaf had said, was well stocked with all things
needful for a voyage; so, weighing anchor, the sail was run up and
the voyage begun.  As they left the harbor, Sigurd told his men of
his advancement, and it was greeted with a shout of satisfaction; for
the Jomsvikings were proud of their young leader, and the other men
had heard many tales of his bravery.  Indeed, even though the title
carried no lands, it was the ambition of every chief of good birth to
be made Jarl, or Earl, for the Jarls were second only to the King.

The oars were run out, for the wind was light, and under all speed
the "Crane" ran southward.  Ketil's ship was out of sight, but his
goal was known, and Sigurd was confident that he would overtake the
other ship before night.

"Why, think you, is he heading for England instead of for Norway?"
Sigurd asked old Biorn.

The latter paused a moment.  "Well, Jarl Sigurd, it is in my mind
that Ketil is a cunning man.  If he took Astrid to Norway, he would
make nothing; but by taking her to England, much.  King Ethelred
would pay high for such a hostage from King Svein of Denmark."

"Oh, I see!  Then she will not be harmed?"

"Assuredly not, Jarl, at least till she reaches England, which I
trust will never be.  Ethelred is as treacherous as Hakon himself,
and if she once falls into his clutches it would be a bad business."

They did not come up with Ketil's ship so soon as Sigurd expected,
for not till mid-afternoon did the helmsman give a shout, and Sigurd,
running to the forecastle, saw a white speck far ahead.

"Lower the sail," he ordered, "and get out all the oars," for until
then only half the oars had been going, to save the men's strength.
"We cannot come up with them to-day," he explained, "so it were best
to let Ketil think himself safe."

So the sail was lowered and the "Crane" proceeded under her oars till
nightfall, when the sail was hoisted again and the oars taken in.
The wind freshened toward midnight, when Sigurd relinquished the
watch to Biorn, and at dawn he was aroused by the old viking.

"Come, Jarl!  A squall from the west has broken on us, and it is
daybreak."

Sigurd followed him to the deck.  There he found the sail
close-reefed, and the "Crane" running before a squall of wind and
driving snow.  There was nothing to be done, however, save to await
the sunrise.

As full day broke, but dark and gloomy, with flurries of snow, a
shout went up, for not half a mile distant lay Ketil's ship, also
running before the wind.

"Shake out the reefs, men!  We may as well take chances, and make
sure of her."

Biorn stopped him, however, and pointing ahead, showed Sigurd a dull
gray line.  "England, Jarl, or Wales, rather!  It would be useless to
try to board Ketil in this heavy sea; the ships would be smashed to
kindling-wood."

Sigurd reluctantly acknowledged that the old viking was right, so he
contented himself with following the other ship, while with every
hour the Welsh coast grew plainer ahead of them.  The sky cleared
off, but the sea was still running too high for any attempt at
boarding.

"I know where we are, Jarl," called out the helmsman.  "Do you
remember that great headland, Biorn?"

"That I do," exclaimed the viking.  "See how the coast falls away
there, Sigurd?  That is Wales, where live my own people, and we are
entering a great firth which goes far up into the country, and on the
right is the Saxon kingdom of Wessex.  I recall it well.  Six years
ago we sailed up and plundered a town they call Bristol.  It must be
that Ketil means to land along the Saxon coast."

Sigurd gazed with interest on the lofty cliffs, but soon they turned
the last headland, and Ketil pointed his ship due east.  Sigurd saw
that they were indeed in a great firth; the "Crane" easily held her
own with the fleeing ship, but did not approach closer.

"If they succeed in getting ashore, whither would they take the Lady
Astrid, think you?" inquired Sigurd.

"To King Ethelred, doubtless," answered Biorn, "at London, in the
east.  However, they cannot escape us now."

"Arm yourselves, men!" ordered Sigurd, a little later, "the sea is
falling fast, and we will run aboard."

Ketil, however, saw this also, and evidently resolved to take no
chances, for he turned in toward the coast, plying his oars
desperately.  The two ships, a quarter of a mile apart, drew into the
coast and ran along the low shores.

Suddenly Biorn gave a cry of fury.  "He will escape us yet!"  Ketil's
ship, just beyond a headland, was turned in toward the shore.  The
helmsman turned the "Crane" and the sail was run down as the other
ship disappeared.  Under all her oars, the "Crane" darted ahead, and
there before them lay the ship of Ketil, while the crew were leaping
out.  A band of armed men from the town above ran down and met Ketil.

Sigurd did not wait to see the meeting, but as the "Crane" scraped on
the sand and ice he leaped overboard, followed by Biorn, and waded
ashore.  Amid Ketil's party Sigurd had seen the flutter of a dress,
and he knew there was little use searching the other ship, so he
dashed up the hill.  Suddenly, however, a flight of arrows fell among
Sigurd's men, and the shout rose of "Death to the sea-wolves!"

Sigurd, with Biorn and another man, was far ahead of the rest,
running at top speed.  As the sudden attack was made, a number of
Saxons sprang out from ambush and surrounded the three.




CHAPTER XI.

AT ETHELRED'S COURT.

Sigurd flung his hand up and sheathed his sword.  The Saxons paused,
and one of their number stepped forward.

"You will get little plunder here, vikings, and many hard knocks," he
called, "so you had best put to sea again."

"We are no vikings or sea-wolves," answered Sigurd.  "I am Jarl
Sigurd Buisson, one of King Olaf's men from Dublin, and am in pursuit
of these men who fled up to the town.  Two days since they abducted a
noble lady from Olaf's own castle, whom I seek to rescue."

The Saxon leader gave an exclamation of astonishment, and at this
moment Sigurd's men ran up and joined him.  The Saxon bows were
raised, but the leader checked them.

"You look over-young to be a Jarl," he declared, "but if your story
is true we have indeed done ill.  The leader of those men said he was
pursued by sea-robbers, and that he was on his way to King Ethelred;
so, although he was a Northman, we gave him safe conduct.  What proof
have you of your tale?"

Sigurd, who was in despair at this unexpected check, knew that it was
necessary to win the Saxon over.  "Does my ship look like a viking
dragon?" he said calmly.  "Were we vikings, we would not be abroad
this time of year.  See, I wear the Cross, and my men are from Olaf's
courtmen, as you may see from their shields and weapons.  We are
Christians all, and no followers of Thor."

At this the Saxon stepped up and shook his hand heartily.  "Your
pardon, Jarl, but I am warden of the coast, and must do my utmost to
defend it from sea-rovers.  I am Jarl Edmund, and now I recall that
in the other party was a woman, or rather girl."

"She is a noble lady of Denmark," said Sigurd, not thinking it wise
to tell Astrid's real position.  "Now, cannot we follow these men to
the town?"

Jarl Edmund turned.  "Of course, but they told us they were on the
King's business, and I sent a man with them to get them horses at
once.  I am indeed sorry for this, Jarl."

"You but did your duty," replied Sigurd, "and there is no help for
it."  He looked at Biorn: "What is your counsel, old friend?"

"Ketil will push forward to London," replied Biorn, "so I think you
had best follow him with the Jomsborg men, and try to catch him.  I
will take the others and the 'Crane,' and proceed by sea to London."

"Good!"  Sigurd turned to Edmund again.  "I suppose we can procure
horses in the town yonder?"

"Yes," replied the Saxon, eager to repair his mistake, "I will myself
go with you."

Sigurd picked out his old Jomsborg men, and saying farewell to Biorn,
made all haste to reach the town.  As they entered, Edmund dispatched
several men, one of whom returned with the news that Ketil's party
had left ten minutes before.  At this Edmund made a gesture of dismay.

"I fear you will not come up with them, Jarl Sigurd, for they took
the best horses to be found.  However, we will see what we can do."

In half an hour Sigurd and his men were riding east, Edmund having
furnished them with a guide.  They pushed on for many days, but found
that Ketil kept well ahead, commandeering the best horses as he went,
on the plea of the King's business.  At Malmesbury and Wantage,
Sigurd and his men were surprised at the size of the cities and the
splendid civilization they found there, which was far ahead of any
that the north could boast of.  Wessex and Sussex had not been
ravaged by the Danes for many years, and the country amazed them by
its beauty and fertility.

"If these Saxons had kings like ours," remarked Sigurd to his men,
"King Svein would have a hard time indeed before he could take the
throne of England."

At Reading they found that Ketil was only half a day ahead of them so
they pushed on to London with all speed, reaching it in the evening.
Next morning Sigurd took his way to the palace.

Here he gave his name and title to the chamberlain, and was shown
into the great hall, around which ran a buzz of astonishment as he
appeared.  Sigurd had filled out amazingly in the last few months,
and was large for his age; he wore his golden helm, a blue cloth
kirtle and waist, and the great sword that Olaf had given him, its
hilt wound with gold and the scabbard thick with carved ivory.  As he
walked up the hall, he removed his helm and let his long golden hair
stream over his shoulders.

The chamberlain led him to the high-seat, and Sigurd knelt a moment
before King Ethelred, then rose.  The king was a pale, crafty-looking
man, and as Sigurd looked around his heart sank for an instant, for
among the courtiers he beheld the mocking face of Ketil.

After the chamberlain announced his name and title, the King arose.
"Greeting, Jarl Sigurd!  The men of King Olaf are ever welcome at our
court, and we look forward to another visit from himself.  Well I
remember Olaf, who spent a year or two with us, and I would fain see
him again.  You look young to hold a Jarlship under so great a man!"

Sigurd answered fittingly, then said, "My lord King, I ask your aid.
Among your men I see a certain Norseman, Ketil Gormson, who not long
since abducted a lady from the castle of King Olaf.  I have followed
him closely, and since he is here, the Lady Astrid is not far away."

King Ethelred looked surprised.  "Why, what is this?  The man Ketil
is a peaceful trader, and arrived here only yesterday.  He has told
me nothing of any lady!"

"Nevertheless," replied Sigurd firmly, "she is with him, and King
Olaf sent me to rescue her.  I must crave your help, King Ethelred."

The king ordered Ketil to stand forth, which he did, a sly smile upon
his face.  Ethelred asked him what he knew of Sigurd's tale.

"Nothing, my lord; I have no woman with me, and have but just arrived
by slow stages from the west coast where I was trading."

Ethelred looked at Sigurd, and then the latter knew that he was being
made a mock of.  No doubt the king had Astrid hid away, intending to
hold her for a hostage.

"You see, Jarl Sigurd," said the king softly, "you must have been
mistaken in this man, who is a kind-hearted fellow indeed.  Anything
that I can do to aid you will be done at once.  Bring your men to the
palace, and you shall be given quarters here."

At these words, and Ketil's mocking smile, Sigurd lost his temper.
Taking a step forward, he cried angrily: "There is no mistake, King
Ethelred, and well you know it!  Think not that you will escape the
heavy hand of Olaf by smooth words, when he hears of this.  As for
you, Ketil," Sigurd turned on the man, who shrank back at his blazing
eyes, "take heed to yourself!  If I meet you outside the palace I
will slay you like the dog you are!"

[Illustration: "_As for you, Ketil, take heed to yourself!_"]

"You forget yourself, Jarl Sigurd," spoke out the king, sternly.  "I
have promised you assistance in this matter, so bring your men to the
palace at once, and we will have search made for the lady."

Sigurd rejoined his men with dismay in his heart.  He knew only too
well that the King's command meant that he would be watched closely,
and he saw no way of rescuing Astrid.  When he told the men the
result of his visit to court, they were as angry as he; but there was
no help for it, and in the afternoon they took up their quarters in
the palace.

Ketil took good care to keep out of Sigurd's way.  The Jomsvikings
wandered freely about the city, staring wonderingly in the shops, and
Sigurd bade them keep a sharp lookout for Astrid.  The days passed
away, and Ethelred tried to soothe his visitors by a pretended search
of the city, and by soft words, but at last Sigurd determined to take
matters into his own hands.  It was now the middle of February, and
Sigurd was impatient to return to King Olaf.

Calling his men together after the evening meal, he said, "Men, if we
are to find Lady Astrid we must do it ourselves.  I believe she is
held here in the palace, in the woman's wing; do you therefore hang
about that side, pretending to look in the shops.  I myself will do
the same, and mayhap the Lady Astrid will either see us, or we will
light on some clue."

Sigurd was treated with great honor, but when he went abroad he knew
that he was spied upon closely.  The next day he visited the shops
near the women's quarters of the palace, and as he sauntered along
one of his men strolled up.

"Come with me, Jarl," he whispered.  Sigurd accompanied him, talking
and laughing, and the man said, "Look at the third window from the
end."

Sigurd did so, and his heart gave a leap of joy.  There, hanging from
a corner of the window, was a scrap of blue and gold cloth that he
knew had been taken from Astrid's scarf.  As he looked up, a face
appeared, but at a quick sign of warning from him, it vanished.

"Hurrah!" he cried, when he had regained his room, "we have found
her, sure enough!  And now to rescue her."

That same evening he heard a wild shout go up from his men, in the
next room, and a moment later Biorn strode into his room.  Sigurd
greeted him with unbounded joy, then seeing Biorn's face half covered
with bandages, cried:

"What is this?  Wounded, Biorn?"

The old viking smiled.  "We met a Danish ship four days ago, Jarl,
and she stopped to talk with us."

"Up to your old tricks, sea-wolf!" laughed Sigurd.  "What did you
talk about?"

"The price of swords, mainly," answered Skarde.  "The Danes finally
decided that ours were better, so we gave them Ketil's old trading
ship and brought in the Dane with us; she is brand new, and as fast
as the 'Crane.'  It was hard work, though, for I had only thirty men,
and they were double that.  We lost ten killed, and half of us are
wounded; but that is no matter.  Now for your story."

Sigurd quickly outlined the position of himself and Astrid.  When he
concluded, Biorn was silent for some time.

"It is no light matter, Sigurd, to brave Ethelred; but I think we had
best carry off the Lady Astrid.  Once aboard the 'Crane,' we would be
safe.  But how to do the business?"

"By craft only, Biorn.  Astrid saw me to-day, and knows we are here.
How to get a message to her?"

"That is easy enough.  Do you write it, and I will shoot an arrow
into her window to-night."

"Good!  I never thought of that."  Sigurd procured a bit of
parchment, and in a few minutes the message was ready.  "I told her
that to-morrow night we would wait beneath her window.  She must
contrive to let herself down, and if necessary we will fight our way
down to the 'Crane.'  Is she below the bridge or above it?"

"Below.  I will go down to-morrow and bid the men be ready to receive
us.  We must get some fresh water on board, too."

An hour later Biorn returned.  "The arrow flew straight, Jarl.  I
waited a few minutes and saw a light cross her shutter thrice."

Sigurd nodded.  "Then she understands.  Get the 'Crane' ready
to-morrow, and return by nightfall.  Better have a boat or two at the
water-stairs, just at the end of this street."

"Trust me, Jarl," said the old viking, and returned to the ship.




CHAPTER XII.

THE FLIGHT FROM LONDON.

The return of Biorn and the finding of Astrid happened so close
together that Sigurd determined to take advantage of his opportunity.
He saw the King twice a day, at meals, and on each occasion Ethelred
seated him near the high-seat and conversed affably with him; but
Sigurd felt that the iron hand was but concealed within a silken
glove, and that the King would soon find means to rid himself of this
troublesome Northman.

The day after Biorn's arrival, at the noonday meal, Ethelred called
Sigurd to his side as usual.

"How is the search progressing, Jarl?  Have you any news yet?"

Sigurd assumed a gloomy air.  "I only wish I had some, King Ethelred.
My ship arrived last night, and I cannot long delay my return to King
Olaf, I fear."

The King seemed unmistakably relieved, and Sigurd judged that his
visit to the shops the day before had not escaped the spies.  Ketil
he had not seen since that first day, but as he always saw some of
his men whenever he left the palace, he believed the Norseman was
keeping close watch on him.

That evening Biorn entered his room shortly after dark with a coil of
thin but strong rope and a light grapnel.

"Is the 'Crane' in shape?" asked Sigurd eagerly.  "We had best wait
an hour or two to let the streets get deserted."

"Yes, all is ready, and two large boats are waiting at the stairs.
We are only three streets from the river, so the escape is open."

"I'm not so sure about that," replied Sigurd uneasily.  "If Ketil
discovers those boats there, and has been following you, as is
likely, we may have trouble yet.  However, time enough for that when
it comes."

An hour later there were few people in the streets, so Sigurd roused
his men and set out.

"We had better not keep together," he said.  "Three of you, with
Biorn, come with me; the others wait at the corner here.  We will not
be long."

So the four quickly made their way to the corner of the palace where
Astrid's window was located.  A high wall enclosed the palace, with a
strip of garden inside; the palace itself had but two stories, Astrid
being on the upper.

As they reached the wall, Biorn flung up the grapnel, which held, and
Sigurd went up the rope, hand over hand.  Changing the rope to the
inside, he slid down, and stood beneath the window.

All was dark above, but when he threw up a stone at the shutter, it
opened and something tumbled out.  Catching it, Sigurd saw it was a
rope made of shreds of curtains; he held it firm, and a minute later
Astrid slid down and stood by his side.

Sigurd greeted her with a silent handclasp, and led her to the wall.
Climbing up, he drew Astrid to the top, and next minute both stood in
the street.  Old Biorn greeted Astrid heartily, and threw a dark
cloak over her dress; and without delay they started for the river.

When they met the dozen men left by Sigurd, he sent them forward with
Biorn to get the boats ready, following with Astrid.  Ten minutes
later they descended the stairs and pushed off, Astrid and Sigurd
standing in the prow of the first boat.

"Hurrah!  You are free at last, Astrid!" cried Sigurd, in a low tone.
At the same instant the girl pulled him sharply backward, and a spear
whizzed under his arm.  A yell arose, and a dark mass in front of
them resolved itself into a large boat full of men.

Sigurd threw all concealment aside.  "Pull, men, pull!" he shouted.
One of the men sank back with a spear through him, and with that the
other boat crashed into Sigurd's.

Standing in the prow, Sigurd cut with his sword at the foremost man,
while Biorn endeavored to ward off the other craft.  Then Ketil's
mocking laugh sounded in Sigurd's ears, and as his blow fell
harmlessly on the other's shield, a boat-hook caught his byrnie and
all but jerked him overboard.

"You have tough bark, friend Sigurd," cried Ketil, as the boy
staggered.  Sigurd tried in vain to free himself from the hook, as
Ketil pulled, so he cried:

"Take Astrid on board and set sail, Biorn!"

Instead of resisting the boat-hook, Sigurd gave a leap forward into
the prow of Ketil's boat.  As he did so, Biorn pulled away, with a
cry of dismay from Astrid, and left Sigurd amid his foes.

When the boy sprang on board, Ketil was pushed back, and he
staggered.  Sigurd cut him down with a single blow, disengaged the
hook from his steel shirt, and looked around.  He had forgotten the
second boat, and this was right alongside.  Striking down a second
man, Sigurd leaped back among his own followers.

"To the 'Crane,' men!  Follow Biorn!"

The men needed no urging, and they soon caught up with the first
boat.  Looking back, Sigurd saw that they were not pursued, for the
others were demoralized at the loss of their leader.

"All safe, Sigurd?" cried Biorn, as they came up.

"All safe," the boy replied, "and I think I have paid Ketil for his
villainy.  At any rate he won't bother us for some time.  Row fast,
men, there is no use trying to hide now."

Shouts rose on the air behind them, and they saw torches darting to
and fro.  Soon they passed below London Bridge, and in a few minutes
were aboard the "Crane," the men on board sending up a hearty cheer.

Sigurd led Astrid to the cabin, while Biorn took charge of the ship,
whose oars were already out.  "Now, Astrid, tell me your story," said
Sigurd, as they sat down.

"Well, about midnight that night, Ketil came to my room with a note
in Runic saying that you were wounded and to come at once.  I thought
it strange that you should send him, but went willingly enough.

"As soon as we were outside the palace his men seized me and carried
me on the ship.  There I was freed, but locked in the cabin.  I
scratched a few words on a piece of wood, for I heard Ketil say they
were going to England, and then heard you come up alongside.  I threw
the wood out of the window, and called, but Ketil ran in and threw a
cloak over my head."

"After that I was treated well enough.  After we landed, Ketil made
me promise not to escape if he left me free; and when we got to
London King Ethelred was very nice to me, giving me women to wait on
me, and many gifts."

"The villain!" cried Sigurd angrily, and he told Astrid all the king
had said.

"I was kept in my room," continued Astrid, "but I had nothing to
complain of.  Then one day I saw you in the shops across the way, and
you know the rest.  I tore up some curtains to make a rope with, and
here I am."

Sigurd laughed.  "Well, shall we stay here, or go out on deck?"

"Out on deck, by all means.  But why do your men call you Jarl?"

Sigurd told her of his last interview with Olaf, and Astrid said,
casting down her eyes: "Well, I suppose after this you will hold me
so far below you that--"

"Nonsense," broke in Sigurd, laughing, "get on deck and stop this
foolery!"

Astrid gayly ran out on deck, and Sigurd followed.  They were
speeding swiftly down the Thames, which is seldom frozen in winter,
and all sound of pursuit was lost.  As there was nothing to be seen
in the faint starlight, Astrid went to bed, Sigurd giving the cabin
up to her, while he took charge of the ship, Biorn relieving him
after a few hours.

At sunrise they were well at sea, and as there were plenty of furs on
board, the men were warmly clad.  Suddenly Sigurd, looking back,
cried out:

"Look there, Biorn!  What ship is that?"

The old viking gave a grim laugh, and then Sigurd recollected the
ship which Biorn had taken on his way to London.

"She had only fifteen men in her, Jarl, for I could spare no more
from the 'Crane'; but yesterday I picked up a score of Norsemen in
London, and as they were willing to take service with Olaf, they are
now on board.  She may come in handy."

"Yes, indeed," agreed Sigurd, "and she is a handsome ship, too.
Where did you get the men, Biorn?"

"Oh!" replied the other, carelessly, "they were prisoners of
Ethelred's, so I invited them to take a cruise.  They were not
closely watched, so there they are!"

"What have you done!" broke out Sigurd, in dismay.  "Don't you know
that this will bring all the Saxon forces down on us?"

Biorn shrugged his shoulders.  "There were only two of Ethelred's
longships lying in the water, Jarl, and seeing that they lay
unwatched, some of the men rowed over last night and all but hewed
away their masts."

Sigurd seized the old viking's hand.  "Pardon, Biorn, I might have
known you better.  That explains why we were not followed; now what
shall we do?"

"Well, it is madness to put to sea in this weather, but there is no
help for it.  I would suggest that we either go north to Mercia or
Northumberland and winter there, or else strike over to Flanders and
go overland to Denmark.  We would be safe enough in the north of
England, for there are many vikings there and Ethelred's power is
weak, to say the least."

"Then let us head for there, gather a few more men if possible, and
strike for Denmark or else Flanders."

This was decided on finally, for Sigurd wished to take the captured
ship with him, but his men were too few to manage both vessels in
case of danger.  So they coasted along the shore of East Anglia, then
turned north, past the Wash, and came to the Humber River.  They met
with no storms on the way, though the weather was cold enough.

Just before reaching the Humber, the "Crane" stopped at a small river
for fresh water.  There were no habitations in sight, so Sigurd and
Astrid went ashore while the casks were being filled.

"It is good to be on land again, Sigurd!" cried Astrid, after racing
and beating him to the top of a small hill.

"I've been at sea so long that I don't notice it much," laughed
Sigurd spreading his fur cloak in the snow for Astrid to sit on.

As they rested, looking over the broad expanse of snow, dotted with
trees and forests that spread inland, they heard the ringing call of
a war-horn from the ships.

"Come on, Astrid!" cried Sigurd, starting up, "something must be
wrong at the ships!"




CHAPTER XIII.

ALFRED OF MERCIA.

They dashed down the hill, and in a few minutes were through the
trees and on the river bank.  They found Biorn drawing up his men.

"Why, what's the matter, Biorn?"

"I am not sure, Jarl, but look up the ice yonder."

He pointed up the frozen bed of the little river, and Sigurd saw a
large party of armed men, pulling a sledge, running toward them.
Sigurd examined them for a minute.

"I don't think they mean to attack us, Biorn, or they would not have
that sledge.  They look like Saxons, so best be ready."

By this time more men had arrived from the ships, and as the Saxons
approached, Sigurd saw that there were some fifty men in the party.
Finding the Northmen waiting, they stopped running, and one, better
dressed than the rest, in a bearskin mantle and helmet, hastened on.

As he came near, Astrid said, "Why, Sigurd, he isn't any older than
you are!  And you were afraid of him!"

Sigurd made no reply save a smile, for, indeed, the Saxon was only a
youth, but a noble-looking one.  Nearly as tall as Sigurd, he was not
so broad, but his face was frank, and attracted the young Jarl at
once.

"Are you Danes or Norsemen?" called the stranger.

"Norsemen," answered Sigurd, "and you are Saxons, I take it."

"Right you are," laughed the boy, with a glance over his shoulder.
"Are you plundering the country?"

"Nay," answered Sigurd.  "We are Christians.  Bid your men stand
back, for our arrows lie loosely on the strings."

The boy laughed again, as if it were a good joke, and turning, waved
to his men, who halted.

"Let me explain," he said.  "I am Alfred, son of Jarl Alfric of
Mercia, and with me is Sigrid my sister.  Briefly, we are flying from
the men of King Ethelred; will you assist us?"

Sigurd, suspecting a trap, looked keenly at the boy; but his gaze was
met squarely, and Sigurd's suspicions vanished.  "Where is your
sister, and your pursuers?" he asked.

Alfred pointed to the sledge.  "My sister is ill, and we have to
carry her."  His face suddenly became serious.  "Hasten your reply,
sir Norseman, for God's sake!  The King's men are not half a mile
behind, and there are nigh three score of them, while half of mine
are wounded or sick."

Sigurd stepped out and gripped his hand.  "No time for talking, then!
Take your sister and the sick or wounded men out to my ships, and let
all your fighting men join mine.  Take charge of him, Astrid, and use
the boats quickly."

The boy called up his men, dividing them as Sigurd had ordered, and
joining the Norsemen with twenty Saxons.

"We will give Ethelred's men a sharp lesson, Biorn.  Do you post the
men as you see fit."

A hundred yards up the river was a bend, and running toward this,
Biorn motioned the men to hide behind the dry bushes that stood along
the banks, while he ran forward to reconnoiter.  A minute later he
returned at full speed.

"Here they are," he cried.  "Pass the word to wait till they come
opposite, then loose arrows and at them with axes."

Barely had Biorn sunk out of sight when the pursuing party appeared,
three-score Saxons under two leaders.  "Pick off the leaders, men,"
whispered Sigurd, and as the party came between the two bands of
Norsemen, Biorn's horn sounded, and a cloud of arrows poured into the
compact body of Saxons.  At the same time the vikings seized their
swords and axes and ran forward.

The Saxons resisted bravely, but their leaders had fallen at the
first fire, and after a minute of sharp hand-to-hand fighting they
broke and fled.

Sigurd had headed his men, engaging a tall Saxon in single combat.
The other wounded Sigurd badly in the shoulder at the first exchange
of blows; and, dropping his shield, Sigurd grasped his great sword in
both hands and rushed his foe.  At the first blow the other's
shield-arm fell, numb with the shock; at the second his sword flew
from his hand and he slipped on the ice, falling heavily.

Seeing that the enemy had broken, Sigurd paused and shouted:

"Back, men, back!  We only want to give them a lesson, not to
slaughter them!"

His own men obeyed, but Alfred's Saxons drove on after the fugitives,
and Sigurd could hardly blame them.  Then he turned to his foe; the
man lay looking up, awaiting the death stroke.

"Get up," exclaimed Sigurd with a laugh, "I am no murderer!"

With an amazed expression, the Saxon slowly got up, and then, seizing
Sigurd's hand in his, knelt and kissed it.  "Thanks, lord," he said,
"you are the first who ever bested Wulf at the sword, and if you will
take him, he will serve you right well!"

Sigurd smiled, but faintly; and Biorn was just in time to catch him
in his arms.  The wounded shoulder was streaming with blood, and he
had suddenly turned faint.

While Biorn held him and the other men crowded around, Wulf tore off
his woolen tunic and deftly bound up the wound, Biorn watching him
suspiciously; then, taking Sigurd's feet while Biorn tenderly held
his body, the two carried him back to the shore.

As they approached, Astrid ran up.

"Sigurd!  Is Sigurd hurt?"

"It is nothing," replied Biorn, "only a wound in the shoulder.  He'll
be all right in ten minutes."

Wulf, who had wounded the boy, now surprised Biorn by his tenderness.
Setting the boy with his back to an ice-hummock, he bathed his face
with snow, and Sigurd opened his eyes.

"Keep quiet," growled Biorn, as he struggled to rise, "I will attend
to the embarking, and you can rest for a space."

By the time the water casks were aboard Alfred and the Saxons had
returned, and the Saxon boy seemed genuinely sorry for his rescuer's
mishap.  All then embarked, and Biorn divided the men between the two
ships.

On the "Crane" he took the Jomsvikings, Olaf's courtmen, and a dozen
Saxons; the Norse prisoners and thirty Saxons went on board the other
ship.  In an hour the sails were hoisted, and the ships bore away
from the land, heading east.

Sigurd sat on the forecastle of the "Crane," Astrid and the two
Saxons near him.  "Now tell me your story," said Sigurd, giving his
own name and Astrid's.

"Our father was the Jarl of Mercia," began Alfred, "but King Ethelred
has always been jealous of his popularity, and has persecuted him
unceasingly.  Three weeks since a party of armed men appeared to
seize our father, but he fled to a Danish ship on the coast, and she
took him off.  My elder brother Alfgar was taken and blinded."

Astrid and Sigurd gave a cry of horror, but Alfred smiled sadly.
"You do not know of what Ethelred is capable, my friends.  In his
present condition Alfgar is unfit to become Jarl, thus being as good
as dead in the King's opinion.

"My father had barely time to send a man to warn us at Lincoln, and
we fled from home just in time to get to the fens and escape.  Some
fourscore men, all devoted servants of my father, fled with us.
Twice Ethelred's men came upon us, and we beat them off, but wounds
and sickness thinned my men, and these are all I have left.  Last
week Sigrid came down with fever, and we had to fly again; but this
time, thanks to you, we are safe.  We will never forget that we owe
our lives to you, Jarl Sigurd!"

Astrid immediately took charge of the sick girl.  Thanks to his
temperate life, Sigurd's wound promised to heal rapidly, and the man
Wulf proved invaluable.  He had been educated in a monastery, and was
skilled in leech-craft, and seemed devoted to the boy Jarl.

"I thought to be killed at once," he told Sigurd, who had summoned
him.  "You are the best swordsman, as well as the only merciful
viking, whom I ever met.  My life is yours, Jarl, if so you will have
it."  The man's words were so sincere that Sigurd accepted his offer
gladly, for he was an expert swordsman as well as leech, and could
both read and write, which was no small accomplishment.

A council was now held on the "Crane's" forecastle, to decide on what
course they should pursue.  They finally came to the conclusion that
they would run south and cross to Flanders, where Alfred and Sigrid
would probably find their father.  As soon as this course was fixed
on, Biorn took charge of the "Snake," as the other vessel was named,
transferring to her that evening.

It proved well, indeed, that he did so, for during the night a gale
swept down out of the northeast, and bore them helplessly before it.
The Saxons on the "Snake," most of whom had never been to sea before,
were of little use, and even Alfred was sick, though Sigrid escaped;
but there was nothing to do save to keep the ships before the wind.
It was bitterly cold, but as the Norsemen did not mind this much, and
the girls were well wrapped up, no one suffered greatly.

Sigurd had no fears for the two ships, for both were new and rode the
waves easily.  The ships of the vikings could only sail with a fair
or a side wind, and as they would be driven far past Flanders unless
the gale broke up soon, the four discussed the situation that evening
in the "Crane's" cabin.

"We are certainly getting all the storms we want," laughed Sigurd to
Astrid, as he came in and shook off the snow.  "Shall we take the
chances and head around for the southern end of England?"

"No!" cried Alfred.  "Cannot we make for Normandy?  There are many
vikings there, and it is settled by Norsemen."

Sigurd shook his head.  "Not unless the wind shifts."

"I see," broke in Astrid, "that you are thinking about getting me
back home.  I admit that I would like to see Vendland again, but why
don't you just take the simplest course, Sigurd, run before the wind,
then around England and back to King Olaf?"

"It sounds easy," laughed Sigurd, "and that is what I would do if I
were alone.  But with you and Sigrid on board I don't like to take
unnecessary risks."

Sigrid laughed as Alfred, in the throes of seasickness, seized his
cloak and left the cabin.  "Don't mind us, Jarl; head for Ireland by
all means!"

"Well," responded Sigurd, "we'll see how things look in the morning.
I'm going to turn in now and get some sleep."




CHAPTER XIV.

IN BRETLAND.

The morning broke dark and gloomy, with no land in sight.  Sigurd,
concluding that they had been driven below the Thames, if not below
the end of England, ordered the helmsman to steer due west, and while
he was unable to communicate with the "Snake," he saw Biorn follow
his example at once, and knew that he understood.

The gale had now lessened to a steady wind from the northeast,
interspersed with flurries of snow, and both ships drove steadily
along under half-canvas.

For two days they held this course, and then Sigurd held a shouted
conference with Biorn.  It seemed evident that they had been carried
south of England, so the prows were turned north, and the next
morning land appeared.  Alfred had found his sea-legs by this time,
while Sigrid was rapidly gaining strength and color from the salt
sea-air, which drove the marsh fever out of her.  She was a very
pretty girl, indeed, with her blue eyes and long flaxen hair, and she
and Astrid were firm friends from the start.

Wulf, who was now more a friend than a captive, was a great favorite
with all on board, even with Alfred's Saxons.  On the morning that
land was sighted, he drew Sigurd aside.

"Jarl, we must have fresh water at once.  Three of the casks were
loosened by the storm and have run out; there is only a cask or two
of ale left."

Sigurd made a wry face.  "Well, that will keep us from thirst, and
the men like it well enough, though I have little taste for it; but
perhaps we can get water from some river along the coast here, or
from the 'Snake.'"

Wulf disagreed.  "All Ethelred's Jarls and Thanes will be looking for
us, you may be sure, and as soon as we are sighted the housecarls
will be poured down wherever we land."

Sigurd thought it over, and finally signaled the "Snake."  Biorn drew
alongside, but when Sigurd mentioned the shortness of water, the old
viking gave a cry of dismay.

"Why, we thought to get some from you!  Never mind, we are drawing
into the coast, and I will make a landing and find out where we are.
We cannot be very far from South Wales, and once there it will be
plain sailing, for the people there are of my own race, and I have
not forgotten the language of the Cymry."

So they steered toward the shore, which was high and rocky.  After
coasting along for two or three hours, a large bay was revealed, half
frozen over, with a hamlet nestling on the cliffs above.

"They are fishing folk, most like," said Alfred, "but there is no
sign of a river hereabouts.  We may have to melt up some of that ice!"

Biorn's ship now drew carefully in, and broke through the thin outer
edge of ice.  When the "Snake" would go no farther, Biorn leaped out
after testing the ice with oars, and a dozen men followed him to the
shore.  They found the hamlet in great consternation, dreading the
forays of the pirates, but Biorn soon appeased their fears, buying a
goodly quantity of fish from them, and returned to the ships.

The "Snake" drew alongside the "Crane."  "No fresh water, Jarl,"
reported Biorn.  "Everything is frozen fast, and these people melt
ice for their needs.  They say there is a river half a mile inland,
but we dare not risk it."

"I would advise that if possible we bear around South Wales and reach
up for the Northern Kingdom.  It will only be a day's difference, and
we won't find much help among the people on this coast.  We might
take in some ice-cakes, in case the ale gives out."

"How long does it take to reach North Wales?" asked Sigurd.

"We ought to get there to-morrow night, or the next day at latest,"
replied Biorn, and Sigurd waved assent.  The ships were rowed up to
the ice and a supply of this was taken on board each ship; then the
sails were hoisted, half the oars put out, and at full speed they
passed along the coast, for Sigurd was determined not to be caught in
another tempest.

Next morning, however, the Land's End was reached, and the prows
turned north.  By nightfall the land was in sight ahead, and early
next morning they drew close into shore.

"I know where we are," shouted Biorn to Sigurd.  "Do you follow me,
Jarl, and we will speedily come to an open river, unless I am greatly
mistaken."

Before noon, indeed, a great shout of joy went up from the men, for
there before them was a bay, with an open river flowing down.  True,
the channel was narrow and dangerous for ships, for the ice nearly
met on either side; but the "Crane" followed the "Snake" closely, and
they entered the channel.  Half a mile from the mouth this widened
out and turned suddenly; as the "Snake" reached the bend Sigurd heard
Biorn's war-horn, and saw his men arming themselves in haste.

"To arms, men!" he shouted, "and be ready for whatever may befall!"
Alfred quickly donned his armor and stood by Sigurd in the prow.  As
they in turn came around the bend, they saw the reason for Biorn's
preparations; there before them lay two large ships, moored for the
winter on shore, with a camp close by.  From their appearance they
were Danes, and high above, on a neighboring knoll, could be seen the
roofs of a town of goodly size.

As the "Crane" came alongside the "Snake," Sigurd saw that the
vikings on shore were also arming and assembling around their two
ships.

"This is the town of Neath, Jarl," cried Biorn, as he leaped on board
the "Crane," "and it was here that I was born.  What ships these are
I know not; shall we draw in and hail them?"

"That would be best," replied Sigurd.  "Doubtless they are some
vikings who are wintering here, but it is strange, indeed, that they
are allowed to remain so near a town, unless they came on a peaceful
errand."

Sigurd ordered the men to row as close to shore as they could.  The
ship stopped two or three hundred yards from it, for it was
impossible to break through the ice, and Sigurd blew a loud blast on
a peace-horn.  In answer came one from the camp, and a dozen men left
the two ships and started over the ice toward the "Crane."

As these came near, Astrid uttered a little cry and caught Sigurd's
arm.  "Oh, Fairhair, look at that big man in front!  That is Halfdan,
the brother of Queen Gunhild, and my own uncle!"

Sigurd looked closely at the man, remembered him well, for he had
seen him often while the Jornsborg men were at King Svein's court.
Halfdan stopped just beyond spear-cast of the "Crane."

"Who are you, and do you come in peace or war?" he called.

"Good-morning!" laughed Sigurd, "don't you know your friends, Jarl?"

The other started, looked keenly at the ship, and ran forward.
"Surely, it is Sigurd Fairhair!" he cried, as he came near.  "And by
the eye of Odin!  Am I dreaming or is this Astrid?"

"Astrid it is, uncle!" laughed the girl, jumping down on the ice and
throwing her arms around his neck.  The Jarl struggled to disengage
himself, and cried in mock dismay:

"Help; help, are you trying to make me captive?  Let loose!  Respect
my dignity!"

Sigurd followed Astrid to the ice, and clasped Halfdan's hand.  "Be
careful, uncle," laughed Astrid, "Sigurd is your equal in dignity
now!"

Sigurd nodded at the surprised look of the Dane.  "Yes, I am one of
Olaf Tryggveson's men now, Jarl, and he made me a Jarl lately,
although I am altogether too young for such an honor."

"Nonsense, nonsense!" replied Halfdan, his merry eyes gleaming with
happiness, "you are the handsomest Jarl I ever saw in my life, upon
my word!  But come up to the camp."

"Wait," said Sigurd, turning to his ships.  "Alfred, do you and
Sigrid join us.  Wulf, you and Biorn take charge of the ships and lay
them up on shore, there beside the others.  We are with friends."

As Alfred and Sigrid climbed down to the ice, the young Jarl
presented them to Halfdan, who greeted them heartily.

"I have heard of your father's misfortune," he exclaimed, "and I was
sorry, indeed, for I fought against him three or four years ago, and
he was a noble foeman.  However, he is safe in Flanders now, and is
like to return before long."

"Why, what do you mean?" cried Alfred, in surprise.

"Come along to the camp and I'll tell you."  Halfdan led the way to
the shore.  "It's too cold to be standing out here talking."

As they entered the camp, the news spread that a party of Jomsvikings
were among the arrivals, and a loud blast went up from the horns,
while the Danes met them with shouts of joy, for the men of Jomsborg
were prime favorites with King Svein's men.  Sigurd found several
whom he knew, while Astrid was met with fresh cheers.  As they
entered the large hut of Halfdan, the Jarl drove the men off.

"Get out of here!" he cried.  "Go down and help stow the ships up on
land beside ours.  We have much to talk over here, and would be left
in peace."

With a last cheer, the men vanished, and Halfdan closed the door.

"Here is food and water, friends, if you are hungry."

"We have plenty of food, but a drink of water would not be amiss,"
answered Sigurd.  "And now, how come you here, in Wales?"

"First make yourselves comfortable." Halfdan piled furs along the
wall, for Astrid and Sigrid, while he and the two boys sat on the
long wooden bench.  "Well, of course you remember the oath that Svein
made that night?  He wasn't in such a hurry as you Jomsvikings were,
but he has been making big preparations.  He sent me here right after
the news of Hiorunga Bay arrived, for he had counted on your men
making a descent on Ethelred from the west as well as from
Northumbria, where he himself will land in the spring or summer.

"I arrived here a month or two ago, and have arranged matters with
Idwal ap Meirig, the King of North Wales.  What barbarous names these
Welsh people have!"

"Probably they think ours just as bad," laughed Sigrid, "for they
hate everything Saxon; and as for your Norse names, I am sure they
used to sound harsh, even to us!"

"Well, in any case, King Idwal is up in the town yonder, has agreed
to join us, and we see him nearly every day.  Now, tell me something
about yourself, Sigurd."

It was late when Sigurd finished his tale, so Halfdan, who had given
orders meanwhile, showed the two girls to a hut that had been hastily
fitted up for them, and shared his own with the boys for the night.




CHAPTER XV.

IN WINTER QUARTERS.

Next morning Halfdan's men joined forces with the new arrivals, and
got the two ships up on the shore, dismantling and unloading them,
while parties of men hastened out to the surrounding woods, and
returned with great quantities of firewood and timber, with which
fresh huts were built.

This was finished by evening, for Halfdan had a hundred and fifty
men, and many hands made light labor.  For several days the Norsemen
rested quietly, for they had many wounded, and some of the Saxons
were still down with fever.  Sigrid, however, was now almost well,
and the jovial roughness of Halfdan amused her and brought the roses
back to her cheeks.

Sigurd and Alfred wished to visit the town above, and if possible to
take up their quarters there, but Halfdan discouraged them from doing
so.

"King Idwal watches us sharp enough, for he has suspicions of every
Northman within a hundred miles.  One cannot blame him, either; the
vikings have ravaged poor Bretland terribly, destroying monasteries
and towns, and burning and plundering.  Your own man Biorn is a
sample; he was carried off in his youth.

"As for visiting the town, it is not worth while.  There is nothing
there save a great castle and a cluster of dirty little houses, and
in any case Idwal has forbidden our men to enter the town.  Once a
week the country folk come down here with their market stuff, and
Idwal sends us ale by the cask.  Never fear, he will be down pretty
soon to see for himself who these new vikings are."

For two weeks they remained in camp, seeing nothing of the Welsh
king, but all were greatly interested in the people, who brought
fresh meat and food into camp once a week.  Indeed, the vikings' camp
at these times assumed the appearance of a fair, for most of the men
made small objects which the country people took in exchange, and
many merchants set up permanent booths inside the camp.  The Welsh
people were smaller by far than the Norsemen or Danes, and their
bright, quick eyes and black straight hair contrasted strangely with
the Northmen and Saxons, most of whom were fair.

Sigurd and Alfred had at first feared that the Saxons and Danes,
hereditary enemies, would not mingle well; but their fears proved to
be unfounded.  Halfdan discovered from the country people that in the
forests to the west, only a few miles distant, wolves were a terrible
scourge; so the men set to work and made skis for themselves, and
even Sigrid learned to use the "snow-skates," as the Saxons called
the long wooden runners.  In the second week of their stay the four
young people and Halfdan took a score of men, leaving the camp in
charge of Biorn, and for three days went off on a wolf-hunt in the
forest.

On their return Biorn told them that word had arrived in their
absence from King Idwal, who intended to visit them on the following
day, with all his court.  Great preparations were made for his
reception.  Pine boughs were brought in from the forest, with which
the huts were decorated gayly, and Halfdan's large hut was hung with
tapestries and cloths, which Sigurd found in the cargo of the vessel
which Biorn had captured.

All the men rubbed up their armor and weapons, and when in the
morning the Welsh were seen winding down the hill, the force was
drawn up in three divisions, the Danes, Norsemen and Saxons grouping
themselves together under the standards of Halfdan, Sigurd and
Alfred.  Presently the Welsh arrived in the valley leading to the
camp, and their coming was greeted by a loud burst from the horns of
the vikings.

[Illustration: "_They were greeted by a loud burst from the horns of
the vikings._"]

Leading the way came a troop of archers, behind whom, mounted on
small shaggy ponies, rode the King and his court.  Idwal was a larger
man than most of his followers, with keen black eyes and firm
features, shaved in the Danish fashion, with two long mustaches.  As
he came up Halfdan advanced and greeted him.

"Welcome, my lord King!  It gives us pleasure to return the
hospitality of your castle!"

Idwal smiled.  "Truly, Jarl, I am glad that these men of yours are
not minded to foray my borders!  We would have a hard time of it to
repel such a force as this.  I heard that you had been joined by a
fresh band of vikings, so came down to assure myself that we were in
no danger."

At this Halfdan motioned Sigurd and his friends to advance and
presented them to the King.  The latter frowned as Alfred came
forward, and swept his eye over the band of Saxons.

"It is many years since a Saxon has dared seek hospitality from the
Cymry, my lad," he remarked.  Then Alfred told his story, and the
king's face cleared.

"Well, to be frank, I have small love for Saxons, but since you are
enemies of Ethelred, that is another matter.  Tell me, in case your
father returned home and I joined with King Svein, would you be for
or against me?"

He gazed keenly at Alfred, but the lad met the look squarely, though
with a smile.  "As to that, my lord King, I can only say that I would
fight for my own land against the invader, whoever he was; yet if my
father thinks it right to join King Svein, as well he may, I will be
at his side."

Halfdan broke in with a laugh.  "Don't be afraid, my lord, this Saxon
will not have to be feared for some time to come!  I dare say that if
you make a foray against Ethelred this spring, he would stand as
stoutly at your side as any of your nobles.  But come into the camp,
my lord."

The vikings opened a path between their ranks, and Idwal led his men
through them.  In an open space amid the huts, Halfdan had cleared
away the snow and stretched a large sail over a number of long
tables, while on either side blazed a dozen great fires.

"By my faith," cried King Idwal, "this is a right royal reception,
Jarl!  An open air banquet is far more to my liking than one inside
these huts, and these fires would warm an army!"

So saying, the king tossed aside his fur cloak, and Sigurd saw that
he wore a light suit of armor beneath it.  In the king's train were
some twoscore nobles, and a bishop, to whom Halfdan accorded the
place of honor.  Among the Welsh, bishops and priests were honored
even above the king, and they found Bishop Dafydd a learned, kindly,
and intensely religious man, who was at once interested in Astrid and
Wulf, with both of whom he conversed at great length.

It was well, indeed, that Halfdan had been hunting for three days
previously, for his stock of venison was heavily drawn upon.  Great
fish were brought in, newly taken from the river below, and to the
delight of the Welshmen a huge boar's head, in the Saxon style, was
placed before the king.  The vikings spared no pains to make the
feast a notable one, and to Sigurd's satisfaction the presence of
Bishop Dafydd and his men prevented it from becoming a wild carouse,
as the Norsemen were only too apt to make it.

Before the King left that evening there was an exchange of gifts, as
was customary.  Biorn and Jarl Halfdan, who were skillful smiths, had
the week before made a beautiful byrnie, of woven gold rings, and
this was presented to the king, who was delighted with it.

He presented Halfdan with a great boar-hound, and to Sigurd he gave a
cloak, edged with fur, the scarlet cloth embroidered in silver
thread.  As he had been informed of the presence of the two girls, he
had thoughtfully brought for them new outfits of garments suited to
their rank.

Idwal returned to his castle that evening, and the bond between him
and the vikings was firmly cemented.  He assured Jarl Halfdan that as
soon as King Svein landed in the east he would pour a flood of men
over the West Saxon earldoms, and Halfdan had no doubt that the
Danish king would fulfill the oath he had sworn at his accession
feast.

After this the camp settled down for the remainder of the winter.
Every week hunting parties, on skis, brought in fresh meat from the
surrounding forests, while their arms were repaired and added to by
the smiths.  The chiefs of the Northmen were all trained armorers,
and his work at the forge added greatly to Sigurd's strength and
widened his shoulders immensely.

The two girls had a most enjoyable time, for every man in the camp
worshiped them.  They joined the hunting parties, and many a wolf
fell before Astrid's bow, while Sigrid, though less warlike, took
part with equal zest.

The time passed away rapidly, and in March the snows melted and the
four ships were run out and overhauled.  They were freshly pitched
and calked, the masts were stepped, and at last they lay at anchor,
fully ready for the sea.

King Idwal paid the camp a second visit, after which the chiefs
returned to the castle with him for a few days.  He sent down
provisions of all kinds for the ships, and at the beginning of April,
Sigurd took leave of Halfdan.

They gathered in the Jarl's hut on the evening before sailing.

"Now, Jarl," said Sigurd, "I suppose you will take Astrid home with
you?"

"That depends," replied Halfdan, quizzically, "upon whether she wants
to go or not!  She seems to like wandering about the world, with a
knight-errant to rescue her and guard her from harm!"

Astrid blushed, and cried, "That's not fair, uncle!  I'm going home
with you--but listen!  Why can't you come with us to King Olaf, and
go home by the north?  It is just as short that way, and far less
dangerous!"

The big Jarl leaped to his feet.  "Hurrah!  I never even thought of
that; I thought to go home around the south of England, but in truth
this way is as short, and I would fain see this King Olaf, whom you
praise so highly."

It had been arranged that Halfdan was not to sail till the next week,
so he at once dashed out and called his chiefs together.  Telling
them of the new plan, the men went to work, by torchlight, and
finished loading his two ships, and by morning all was ready.

With a fair wind they reached out into the bay, and three mornings
later, after coasting along the Irish shore, they came in sight of
the towers of Dublin.




CHAPTER XVI.

AN AMBUSCADE.

Sigurd was received with unbounded joy by King Olaf, for he had been
given up for lost in the storm that swept the coast just before his
departure.  Halfdan stayed in Dublin for a week, then decided to
return home without further delay.

Sigurd parted with Astrid sorrowfully, for they had become very dear
to each other in their wanderings, and although Alfred and Sigrid
remained with him, he knew that he would miss her greatly.

"Never mind," he said, as they walked down to the ships, "we will
land in Norway this summer or fall, and be sure that I will turn up
at the Danish court, or in Vendland, not long after."

"I'll be glad to see Vagn once more, when I get home," said Astrid.
"It will seem almost as good as seeing you."  Halfdan had told them
of Vagn's safe arrival home, so that Jarl Eirik had evidently been
true to his word.

Sigurd and Alfred, in the "Crane," accompanied Halfdan's ships for a
few miles; then, with a last farewell to Astrid, the "Crane" was
turned about, and sought Dublin again.

Sigurd's duties were light at the court.  Olaf's Irish kingdom was
not divided in districts, ruled by Jarls, as was Norway; so that
Sigurd had little to do beyond commanding the courtmen.  Alfred had
not done homage to King Olaf, for he resolved to remain true to his
own land; nevertheless, the King gave him a command, and Alfred bore
himself well indeed.

With the beginning of summer Olaf took all his warships out of the
water, scraped the bottoms, and gave them a thorough overhauling.
Thorir Klakke was still in Dublin, and Sigurd found that he was
urging the King to sail as soon as might be for Norway, saying that
the bonders would flock to him on his arrival, so that he need not
take so large a force.  King Olaf, who thoroughly understood his
treachery, did not undeceive him; but to Sigurd he said, one night
after Thorir had left the hall:

"Jarl, if ever a man deserved hanging, there is one.  While you were
absent in England, two half-brothers of mine were driven from Norway
by Jarl Hakon, and came to me here.  Thorir tried to bribe them, and
fortunately they let him think that they fell in with his plans,
which he disclosed fully.

"Jarl Hakon, in truth, sent him here.  Thorir will try to slay me on
the voyage," the King smiled grimly, "but if he fails, he is to get
me on shore at a certain point where Hakon will keep men in waiting
day and night.  These men are to fall on me and kill me."

Sigurd gave a cry of anger, and the priest, Thangbrand, growled out,
"Let me attend to him, Olaf!  I'll warrant he does not trouble you
any more!"

Olaf laughed heartily.  "Thangbrand, you are more fitted for a viking
than for a priest!  If I ever win Norway, I will send you to Iceland
to convert that island to Christ."

The priest's face lit up.  "Thanks, my King!  It is a shame that so
fair an island as that should have no church of Christ in all its
length!  It may be that I will meet resistance there, but methinks I
can hold my own."

Sigurd laughed at this characteristic speech.  Thangbrand was a
strange mixture of priest and warrior.  Driven from home for his
quarrelsome disposition, he had joined himself to Olaf; but in
reality the man was deeply religious, and he was, indeed, the ideal
man to carry the Cross to heathen Iceland.  In those days the Cross
and sword went together, and the old gods of Norway knew many martyrs
to their faith before Christianity was established in the land, in
later years.  Right or wrong, this was the spirit of the age, for men
overlooked the fact that Christ's gospel was one of peace, and in
their enthusiasm and religious fervor they spread it with fire and
sword.

There was much irregular fighting around Dublin, for the Irish kings
were ever striving to drive the Norsemen from their land.  They
fought bravely, but their men were ill-armed compared with the
vikings, and Olaf had no trouble in preserving order for many miles
around the city.  His brother-in-law, Olaf Kvaran, was away on a trip
to Iceland at this time.

"How would you like, Jarl," said Olaf to Sigurd one evening, "to
visit King Brian Boroimhe?  I am minded to make peace with him, for
when I go to Norway I want to leave Dublin in security, and my
brother is not to be relied on.  A firm peace with King Brian for at
least a year would be an excellent thing."

"I would be glad, indeed," replied Sigurd, "for I have heard so much
about the interior of Ireland that I would fain see it."

"Well, I will have letters written in the Irish tongue," said the
King, "and do you take what men you will, together with an
interpreter.  Be ready to start next Monday, and I think you will
find the King at Kells, a large place some thirty miles to the west.
However, I will provide a reliable guide."

Thangbrand, the priest, hearing of the embassy, eagerly sought leave
to accompany Sigurd, which Olaf willingly granted.  So, on the
following Monday, Sigurd, the priest, and a score of men left Dublin.
Their weapons were all in peace-bands, and an Irish captive was taken
as guide and interpreter, having promised to lead them to Kells in
exchange for his liberty.

Sigurd laughed when Thangbrand joined the party.  The huge priest
wore a byrnie under his gown, a light steel cap on his head, and at
his saddle-bow was shield and sword.

"No one knows what may happen," he replied stoutly, to the boy's peal
of laughter, "we may be waylaid by these Irish thieves, or this guide
may lead us astray, and it is best to be prepared for anything."

Kells was only a good day's march away, so they set forward briskly.
After reaching the bounds of Olaf's territory the road lay through
woods and swamps for a dozen miles; but toward evening they emerged
on an open plain, partly cultivated, and saw in the distance the
spires and towers of a large city.  Several times they had been
stopped by bands of Irish, but their guide served them faithfully.

Sigurd was amazed at sight of Kells.  "Why, this is wonderful!" he
said.  "I had no idea that there was such civilization so near to
Dublin!"

Thangbrand smiled.  "Kells has seldom been ravaged by vikings, for
many years; it is a strong place, with a great monastery in the town.
I have been here once before, and found that the land is beautiful
enough in times of peace, but in war-time it would be well-nigh
impossible to reach the city."

Sigurd saw that this was so, as they approached, for on either side
of the road were defenses, and several stone castles came in sight.
Just at sunset they entered the gates of the town, and their guide
spurred ahead to find quarters for the men.

As they passed through the streets they met with sour looks and loud
curses from the Irish, who hated the Northmen bitterly, with only too
much reason.  The vikings had ravaged the fairest vales of Erin, had
destroyed her monasteries and splendid civilization, and but for the
strong hand of King Brian would have overrun the country utterly.
That night they took their quarters in a large inn, and the next
morning visited the court.

The King's palace was far beyond anything Sigurd had ever seen, even
in London.  It was built of stone, and the great hall within was a
blaze of arms and tapestries.  The nobles who thronged the hall were
clad much as were the Northmen, but their golden bracelets and
cloak-pins were richly wrought, and the precious metal seemed
abundant.

Sigurd led his men to the high-seat, and bowed low to King Brian, the
famous chieftain.  The latter was a powerful, stern-faced man of some
sixty years, and he opened and read the letters of Olaf with a frown,
afterwards handing them to a monk who stood at his side.

"Sir Jarl," he said, without rising, fixing his gray eyes on Sigurd,
"I will have an answer written at once.  For the present you and your
men will be quartered in my palace here.  King Olaf is a brave and
worthy man, and I am glad to conclude a year's truce with him; were
other Northmen like him, Erin would be a happier land."

The monk translated the King's words, and bowing low, Sigurd retired.
Thangbrand at once visited the monastery, taking Sigurd with him; and
although the good monks were somewhat surprised at the warlike
appearance of the priest, they entertained their visitors well, and
showed them over the buildings.

Next morning Sigurd had another audience with King Brian, who handed
him a parchment for King Olaf, and presented him with a heavy golden
arm-ring; after which the Norsemen left the city at once on their
return journey.

They rode along at a good pace, and as they came near the boundaries
of Olaf's territory, Sigurd and Thangbrand rode somewhat ahead of the
party; for Thangbrand, who was an adept at horsemanship, of which the
young Jarl knew little, was showing Sigurd how to make his steed
curvet and prance, and thus they insensibly drew ahead of the rest.

They turned a bend in the road, which wound along beneath thick
trees; and as they did so a number of men sprang to their horses'
heads, and others sprang at Sigurd and Thangbrand, striving to pull
them from their saddles.  At the same instant, before they could
grasp their weapons, men dropped on them from the branches overhead,
and a minute later the two Norsemen, bound hand and foot, were being
hurried away through the forest depths.




CHAPTER XVII.

KETIL TURNS UP.

Far behind them sounded a few faint shouts and horns, as the men
reached the spot where the two leaders had been ambushed; then these
died away into silence.  Sigurd saw that they were carried by a band
of two dozen Irish, who were hastening north through the forest.  He
started to speak to the priest, who was borne at his side, but one of
the men struck him roughly on the mouth, with a sharp command in
Irish, and he ceased.

At nightfall the band halted beside a stream, and Sigurd judged they
had traveled several miles from the scene of their capture.  A
blazing fire was built, over which the men cooked their meal, the two
captives being flung down beneath a large tree.

"What fools we were to leave the guide!" growled Thangbrand into his
thick black beard.  "I wish they would give us somewhat to eat."

His wish was gratified immediately, for the leader of the band
approached, cut the ropes that bound their hands, and gave them bread
and meat, and a horn of water from the stream.  After this they were
bound again.

"They seem to be expecting someone," exclaimed Sigurd, "did you note
that the leader had sent men out in all directions?"

This had indeed been done as soon as they arrived, and an hour later
there was a shout, and into the firelight came a second body of men.
As they saw them, Sigurd gave a cry of amazement, for at their head
was Ketil Gormson, whom he had left in London the winter before!

The new arrivals were also Irish, Ketil being the only foreigner.
The leader of the first party greeted him, and Ketil put into his
hand a bag that clinked pleasantly.  Then he stepped forward to
Sigurd's side.

"So I have you at last, my lord Jarl!" he cried, an evil light in his
dark eyes.  "It is a far cry from London to Ireland, but I have
watched and waited patiently."

"It is a pity that I didn't strike harder that night!" replied
Sigurd.  "What is your object in this attack?"

Ketil laughed shortly.  "You go with me to Jarl Hakon, my fine
fellow, and as for this follower of the white Christ, I think I will
turn him over to these good friends of mine in the morning."

Sigurd turned pale, for he knew that any Norsemen who fell into the
hands of the Irish obtained short shrift.  Thangbrand, however,
roared out:

"Loose my hands, you traitor, and face me with drawn blade!"

"So," sneered Ketil, "I thought that priests of your God were meek
and humble men, willing to die for their faith!"

Thangbrand flushed under the reproof, and fell silent.  Ketil turned
away, set a guard over the captives, and in a few minutes the band
lay sleeping in their cloaks beneath the trees.

The Norsemen's weapons had not been taken from them, but as they were
bound firmly they were of no use.  Sigurd, however, saw that the
peace-bands had been torn from his sword in the hasty flight through
the forest.

An hour after this he felt Thangbrand's hands touch his.  The two
captives lay side by side, and their guard was sitting a few feet
away, nodding sleepily.  Turning by inches, Sigurd looked at the
priest, and saw him motion toward the unbound sword.

Sigurd, very slowly and cautiously, rolled over on his face, bringing
the weapon within reach of Thangbrand, who at the same time turned
his back.  Thus his hands, after a little vain searching, met the
hilt of the weapon and slowly drew it forth.  An instant later their
guard straightened up and strolled over to them.

Sigurd lay on his face, and with a quick movement Thangbrand had
thrust the drawn blade beneath him.  The guard, thinking that both
were asleep, turned away, humming an air, and Sigurd caught a faint
rasping noise as the sword blade cut through the priest's bonds.

Soon the guard returned, and stooped over Sigurd, who lay nearer him,
to assure himself that his bonds were right.  As he did so,
Thangbrand drew him down to the earth, his hands about the man's
throat.

The struggle was brief and noiseless.  In a few seconds the man
relaxed, and the priest quickly bound and gagged him; then he cut
Sigurd's bonds, whispering:

"If my hands were not so stiff I would have done better."

Indeed, Sigurd found that his hands and feet were too stiff to move,
for he had been tightly bound.  They both sat for a moment rubbing
their limbs, then arose.

"Which way, Jarl?"

"West, Thangbrand.  Once we strike men belonging to King Brian we
will be all right, for his bracelet here will be known, and you are a
priest, too."

Without a word more they stepped away, each picking up a light shield
from beside the sleeping men as they went.  The forest was dark, but
as the moon was just rising Sigurd knew that their way would soon be
light enough to travel fast.

In half an hour they were well away from the camp, and both broke
into a swift trot, threading their way among the trees, and as far as
they were able heading west.  The trees were roughly barked on the
north, and this guided them somewhat, for both men were accustomed,
at home in Norway, to finding their way through the forest by such
signs.

"Hold up, lad," panted Thangbrand, after an hour's running.

Sigurd slackened his pace, for the ground was too uneven and rough to
keep it up longer, and for a time they walked swiftly onward.

"Pray heaven that we strike no bog or morass," said Thangbrand, "for
if we do we are lost."

"I wonder if we will be pursued?"

"If we are, I do not propose to fall into their hands alive,"
answered the priest, stoutly.  "They are evidently some wandering
band, who have been hired by that villain Ketil.  I'd like to get him
within reach of my sword!"

They kept onward till dawn, walking and running by turns.  As the
gray light broke through the trees, they found that the forest was
thinning out somewhat, and Thangbrand flung himself down for a brief
rest.

"I think we must be getting near the cultivated fields in that broad
plain we crossed yesterday," conjectured Sigurd.  "If we can once get
to Brian he will protect us, for I have heard that no one could be
more jealous of his word than he."

Ten minutes later they continued their way.  The sun was just rising
now, and as they stood on the top of a small hill, vainly endeavoring
to see some signs of habitation, a faint yell arose from the forest
behind them.

"Come on, Thangbrand," exclaimed Sigurd, breaking into a run.  "It is
a matter of speed now."

For half an hour they kept up a brisk trot, but could hear the yells
rising from time to time behind them, each louder than the last.
Finally Thangbrand stopped short.

"Go on, Fairhair.  I am clean winded, and your life is worth more
than mine to Olaf.  Do you go on, while I hold them here as long as
may be."

"One of the Jomsborg oaths," replied Sigurd, quietly, "is to never
desert a comrade--"

"Out upon your Jomsborg oaths!" roared Thangbrand.  "Get you gone,
and lose no time!"

"Listen!" cried Sigurd quickly.  "Isn't that a horn?"

Far off toward the west they heard the faint notes of a war-horn,
while from behind them a loud shout arose, as their pursuers came in
sight.

"Hasten, Fairhair," cried the priest, unsheathing his sword.  "Go
yonder and bring help while I hold them here!"

Sigurd smiled and unsheathed his own weapon, as he looked around.

"Cease this nonsense," he said, though not without a thrill at
thought of the generosity of the big man.  "Let us stand beneath this
big oak, where we can swing our swords without being struck in the
back."

They took position on either side of a large oak tree, and five
minutes later the first of their pursuers appeared.  He halted at
seeing them, and sent up a yell; as his comrades came up, they spread
out, enclosing the tree in a circle.

To do him justice, Ketil was brave enough.  When he appeared, he led
a dozen men straight at the tree, and in a second the two were
fighting furiously.  The Irish crowded around, striking with their
long knives, but speedily recoiled before the terrible sweep of
Thangbrand's huge sword, and the more scientific, but no less deadly,
blows of the young Jarl.  As they retired, their chief yelled an
order, and the arrows began to whizz past.

The first Sigurd caught with his shield, the second he cut in two as
it flew.  A shout of amazement went up from the Irish as Thangbrand
did the same, for, unacquainted as they were with the exercises and
training of the Norsemen, this skill seemed little less than magical.
Again and again the two men repeated the trick, but it was impossible
to ward off more than one or two shafts at a time, and soon both
Thangbrand and Sigurd were wounded.  Suddenly Ketil sprang at Sigurd
with a shout of impatience.

The Irish circled around, watching the combat with eager eyes,
forgetful of all else, while Thangbrand guarded Sigurd's back.
Thrice Ketil's steel met that of Sigurd, then seeing an opening, the
latter struck; but his feet slipped on the dew-wet grass, and he fell
headfirst.

Thangbrand was instantly bestriding his body, facing Ketil.  At this
the Irish came in behind him, watching eagerly for a chance to use
their long knives, while the priest crossed swords with Ketil.
Suddenly the latter threw up his arms as something flew past
Thangbrand, and fell with a spear through his body as a yell of
terror went up from his band.

Looking about as he raised Sigurd to his feet, Thangbrand saw King
Brian Boroimhe behind him, sword in hand, while his men pursued the
fleeing band in all directions, cutting them down without mercy.




CHAPTER XVIII.

A MISSION FOR THE KING.

The King addressed Thangbrand in Latin, which the priest understood
fairly well.

"Just in time, my friends!  The guide whom I sent with you returned
late last night with word of your mishap, and early this morning I
sent men in all directions, joining myself in the search, for I was
greatly angered that my safe-conduct had been broken in this wise."

"We owe you our lives, my lord," responded Thangbrand gratefully.
"These men were in the pay of a traitor, whom your spear slew before
I had a chance at him, unfortunately."

The old king smiled, not unkindly.  "Strange words for a man of God,
sir priest!  But I see that your blade has done good service to Jarl
Sigurd, and perhaps in these times a priest must be man of the world
as well."  King Brian sighed heavily as he looked around, then said,
"Ask the Jarl if he has my letters safe."

When Thangbrand translated, Sigurd held up the letters, their seals
unbroken; and now the King's men returned, and the party went to
Kells at once.  Here, as Sigurd was in haste to get back to Dublin,
the King gave him an escort of fifty men, and they set out without
delay.

Upon reaching the territory of Olaf, Sigurd dismissed the Irish and
pushed forward; but on coming within sight of the city he gave an
exclamation of dismay.  Instead of the King's standard, there floated
from the castle a huge black banner!

Wondering greatly, they galloped up to the city and entered.  To
their amazement, the shops were all closed, and the whole city wore
an air of mourning.  Sigurd, without stopping to ask questions, left
Thangbrand and hurried to the great hall.

It was empty, save for Olaf, who sat in the high-seat, his head bowed
in his hands.  Sigurd advanced and held out the letters.

"Here, my lord, is the reply of King Brian Boroimhe.  Why is the
black standard on the castle, and why are all the shops shut?"

Olaf raised his head and gazed at Sigurd with heavy eyes.

"Welcome back, Jarl, in an evil hour.  Queen Gyda died last night."

As Sigurd stared at the King, the latter rose slowly, descended from
the high-seat, and taking Sigurd's arm in his, exclaimed:

"Sigurd, come and talk to me.  I am lonely, and the most wretched of
all men."

They walked up and down the hall, and Olaf told Sigurd how the night
before the Queen had been seized with a fatal illness.  Good Bishop
Sigurd, the English prelate who had come to Ireland with Olaf, had
done his best, for he was a skillful leech, but to no avail.

"Why should this evil come upon me now?" cried the King, bitterly.
Sigurd said little, allowing the King's pent-up grief to find
utterance, then he said, softly:

"It is the will of God, Olaf, and perhaps he has done it for the
best.  May it not be that he means you to give your whole life to the
spreading of his Word in heathen Norway, and has sent you a touch of
adversity to try you?"

"Mayhap," responded the King, "but it is hard.  He has given me good
fortune, and I must bear the bad when it is his will; it may be true
that he wishes me to devote myself, heart and soul, to bearing his
gospel to my countrymen."

The blow was a terrible one to Olaf, and it was indeed many a month
ere he recovered a portion of his former light-hearted spirits.  Two
days later the Queen was buried, and after the period of mourning
Olaf threw himself into the work of preparing the expedition with
feverish energy.

This was no light task, indeed.  Olaf had a dozen warships in the
harbor, but it was impossible to take so large a force, as men had to
be left to defend Dublin.  Olaf had decided to give up his Irish
land, in case of succeeding in Norway, to his brother-in-law, Olaf
Kvaran, but he could not leave him without men.

At last, after many consultations with Sigurd and his other chiefs,
the King decided to take only the five largest ships, which would
hold about seventy-five men each.  Thorir Klakke had no inkling that
Olaf knew of his treachery, and he advised the King to make a sudden
descent on Norway and to take Jarl Hakon unawares at Thrandheim,
before men could be gathered.  Thorir, in giving this advice, thought
that either he would be able to kill Olaf by treachery on the voyage,
or else that the men of Hakon, posted at Agdaness in Norway, would
remove Olaf before the plan could be accomplished.

The five ships were fitted up in the best of shape.  The dragon heads
were taken from their prows, and in the place of these great crosses
were set up, for Olaf knew that only by the favor of God would he be
able to win his father's kingdom.  They were laden with all the
wealth that Olaf had gathered in his travels through Russia,
Constantinople, and England, and at length the expedition was ready
to start.

It was a bright morning in August that the King went on board his
ships, followed by all his men.  Before doing so, he called Alfred
and Sigrid to him, and asked them what they intended to do.  Alfred
hesitated, for although he wished to accompany Olaf, he did not
forget that his father was in Flanders, and he did not like to
separate from his sister.  Finally, Olaf said, with a smile:

"You both had best come with me.  I have a plan which I think will
work out to your satisfaction; I will tell you later just what it is.
Put all your Saxons on board the 'Snake,' Alfred--the ship that old
Biorn captured in England, and sail with us.  Sigurd will command the
'Crane,' and when we get to the Orkneys I will tell you what I have
in mind."

So, wondering what the King meant, the "Snake" was added to the
fleet, to Sigurd's great joy.  He had feared that Alfred and his
sister would be left behind, and it was with no small satisfaction
that he helped fit out the "Snake."

When the men were all embarked, Bishop Sigurd, standing in the prow
of King Olaf's ship, offered up a solemn prayer asking the aid and
the blessing of God for their enterprise.  As he concluded, a great
"Amen!" rolled over the sea from ships to shore, the anchors were
weighed, and the journey was begun amid a blare of war-horns and the
clash of arms.

The Pentland Firth was not passable, according to reports brought to
Olaf, so he bore up for the Orkneys, as had been his wish from the
first.  These islands had long been settled by Norsemen, and Jarl
Sigurd Lodvarson ruled them: but the Jarl and his people were all
heathen, for no missionaries or Christian men had been allowed to
settle in the islands.  It was Olaf's firm intention to spread the
Word of God wherever he went, and as the Orkneys were in his path, he
decided to visit Jarl Sigurd.

This was a dangerous proceeding, for the Jarl was powerful, and might
have settled the fate of the expedition there and then; but matters
came out luckily for Olaf.  His six ships came to anchor in Asmundar
Bay, in Rognwald Island, and in the bay they found a single ship
lying at anchor.

Olaf, seeing that the ship was a fine one, and very beautifully
furnished, dispatched Sigurd Fairhair to bring her commander on board
his own ship, hoping to get news of Norway.  To his surprise, it
happened that this commander was no other than Jarl Sigurd Lodvarson
himself!

Olaf greeted him with a smile.  "Truly, it seems that we have an
abundance of Sigurds here!  Yourself, my own Jarl Sigurd Fairhair,
good Bishop Sigurd, of England, and possibly a score of my men, all
named alike."

The Jarl, not knowing where King Olaf was bound with his fleet, was
somewhat fearful for his safety, and when Olaf urged him to be
baptized, he refused, saying the faith of his fathers was good enough
for him.  Then King Olaf arose, holding in one hand a sword, in the
other a cross.

"Jarl, you hold, as Jarl of the Orkneys, part of my inheritance, for
I claim all the lands as mine which the Kings of Norway have
possessed.  As it has come to pass, by the will of God, that you are
in my power, there are two courses open to you.  The one, that you
accept the true faith, and allow yourself to be baptized, with all
your subjects.  You may expect to hold under me the Jarldom which you
now possess, and what is of more importance, you may hope to reign
for ever in a nobler kingdom than this.

"The other course, a very wretched one, is that you die; and after
your death I will pass over the islands and bring the folk to believe
in the true God.  Now choose, Jarl, which course you will take."

The Jarl hesitated; then he slowly stretched out his hand and took
the cross from that of Olaf.  This action was greeted with glad
shouts from the crews, and without delay Bishop Sigurd baptized Jarl
Sigurd.

Then he swore oaths of fidelity to King Olaf, and placed in the
King's hands his son, Hundi, who was also baptized, and who
accompanied Olaf to Norway as a hostage.

Next day Olaf came on board the "Crane."

"Sigurd," he said, "are you willing to undertake another mission for
me?  You seem to scrape through somehow, no matter what happens, and
as this one is of some importance I can think of no one better fitted
to undertake it."

Sigurd smiled.  "If I have scraped through some tight places, Olaf, I
don't ascribe it to my own conduct!  I have been fortunate in finding
friends, and for the rest, God has protected me.  Now tell me what
this mission is."




CHAPTER XIX.

AT KING SVEIN'S COURT.

Astrid and Halfdan had a safe and quiet voyage home to Denmark, but
when they arrived there they found that many changes had taken place
during the winter.  The pale, quiet, religious Queen Gunhild had
died, and as she alone had restrained King Svein from his wild and
warlike impulses, the King was gathering great forces for his descent
on England.

Astrid took up her abode in the castle as formerly, but the life was
a lonely one.  Her parents had died when she was a child, and only
her Uncle Halfdan was near her.  She disliked King Svein, who,
although he always treated her well and kindly, was a moody and
irritable man, with no thought for anything save his selfish
ambitions.  Soon after Astrid's return he placed in her care his two
sons, Harald and Canute, and she took great interest in the education
and care of the two lonely boys, little thinking that in after days
the younger was to prove a great and worthy king of England, thanks
to her early teachings.

So the summer passed, while men assembled and were sent on to the
Danish settlements in the north of England to wait the arrival of
Svein in the fall.  Jarl Halfdan was sent in command of one of these
detachments, and after his departure Astrid felt her loneliness more
than ever.

One day King Svein sent for her.  Wondering at the summons, Astrid
proceeded to the hall, where she found the king surrounded by his
chiefs.

"Lady Astrid," he said abruptly, "prepare your belongings for a
journey.  Your hand has been asked in marriage by the son of King
Vladimir of Russia, and needless to say, I have accepted the offer,
for besides being a great honor, this will bring to my army a number
of ships from Russia."

Astrid was overwhelmed, but answered the King bravely.  "You have no
right to dispose of my hand, King Svein, in this fashion!  It is
unjust to me, for I am not your vassal.  My lands lie in Vendland,
and if necessary I shall appeal to King Burislaf for protection
against this outrage!"

The King's face darkened.  "You will do as I order!" he exclaimed
angrily.  "King Burislaf also will do whatever I order him, and this
is a thing unheard of, that a girl should decide her own marriage!"

A murmur of assent went up from the chiefs, and Astrid gazed
hopelessly around the circle of fierce faces, finding no hope in
them.  How she longed for her good uncle to stand at her side!  But
as the King said, a girl in those days could rarely indeed marry whom
she liked; her parents or guardian settled that without consulting
her, and Astrid felt that she was helpless.  "This is a noble
marriage," continued the King, more calmly, "so let me hear no more
of these protests.  You will leave here in two weeks for Gardarike,
Vladimir's capital, with a fitting escort."

With that the girl was dismissed to her apartments.  Young Canute,
hearing of the matter, tried to comfort her, but the boy was of
course as helpless as she.  So, although Astrid resolved that the
marriage should never take place, even though she had to fly from
home, the packing of her effects proceeded.

A week later, as she was sitting sewing in the garden, she heard a
great noise from the harbor, shouts and war-horns mingling with the
clash of arms.  She sent Canute to see what it was about, and
presently the boy came running back, his eyes bright and his cheeks
flushed with excitement.

"Oh, Astrid!" he cried, "we have visitors!  Two great ships just
sailed into the harbor, from far over the sea--the strangest ships!
They didn't have any dragon in the bow, but instead was a big gilded
cross!  All the men on board had shields with red crosses on them,
and I saw them as they landed--great warriors, all of of them!"

Astrid's cheek paled suddenly.  What ships could these be, sailing
under the Cross, unless--?  Canute continued hastily: "And, Astrid,
you ought to see the chiefs!  There is one old viking, so fierce and
brave-looking, and a beautiful girl with bright yellow hair, and a
boy who must be her brother; but greatest of all was a young man with
hair like sunlight, streaming over his shoulders, and a great golden
helmet--"

Astrid did not wait to hear the rest.  Dropping her work, she ran to
her rooms, her heart beating wildly.  Swiftly calling her women, she
attired herself, and descended to the hall, which was empty.  She
hastened out, and leaving the castle, went down to the harbor.

There all the townfolk and the men from the castle were crowded about
the market place, and as they made way for her respectfully, Astrid
saw King Svein talking to a number of people, whom she could not see
for the crowd.  As she made her way through the press, a well-known
voice fell on her ear; and then, with flushed cheek, she found
herself face to face with Sigurd Fairhair!

[Illustration: _She found herself face to face with Sigurd Fairhair._]

He gave a cry of delight as he saw her, and gripped her hands until
they hurt.

"Astrid!"

"Why, Sigurd!" she replied, noting how he had grown, "what a big man
you have become already!  Oh, how glad I am to see you--and how I
need you, too!" she added in a lower tone.

Sigurd gave her a quick, anxious look, then turned.  "Here, Alfred,
Sigrid!" he shouted, and the next minute the two girls were in each
other's arms, while the crowd looked on, amazed.  Sigurd told King
Svein something of their tale, then the king ordered all to follow
him to the castle.

"We can talk in peace there," he said.  "Do you come up at once.  My
men will attend to your ships, so bring your warriors ashore and let
them be entertained at the barracks."

Sigurd left this to Biorn, and the four young people followed Svein
to the castle, where they seated themselves in the hall, below the
high-seat.

"Now, how do you come to be here, of all places?" asked King Svein,
who remembered Sigurd well.  In return Sigurd told him about the
rescue of Alfred and Sigrid.  Svein nodded.

"I know the story.  Jarl Alfwic is even now with my army in England.
Go on."

"King Olaf," continued Sigurd, "sent Alfred and his sister to you
asking that you take them with you to their father; or, if you could
not do this, to see that they received a pilot to take them safely to
Flanders.  However, since you are going to England before long
yourself, that is settled."

"Right glad will I be," replied the King, "to have the son of Jarl
Alfwic with me.  They will be safely delivered to the Jarl, have no
fear."

"As to myself," said Sigurd, "that is another matter.  King Olaf has
sailed for Norway to take the kingdom from Jarl Hakon, and--"

He was interrupted by a cry of amazement from the Danes.

"What say you?" shouted Svein, leaping up, "King Olaf has sailed for
Norway?  Skoal!  Skoal!" The chiefs roundabout echoed the cheer.

"He sent me to you, King Svein, to ask that if possible you will send
him ships and men; or, if you cannot do this, that at least you will
not aid Jarl Hakon and Jarl Eirik."

"As to the first request, I cannot do that," replied Svein, "for I
need every man I can raise.  Be sure, however, that Olaf need fear no
attack from me; I will be joyful, indeed, when the traitor Hakon is
driven from Norway!"

"That will be good news for Olaf," rejoined Sigurd, "for an attack in
the rear would be fatal.  He has but five ships, of which mine is
one, and his success will depend entirely on his being able to
surprise Hakon."

Sigurd then told of how Olaf had Christianized the Orkneys, and how
he had dispatched him immediately on this journey.  Olaf was to
remain three weeks in the islands, baptizing the people, and had
arranged to meet Sigurd at Moster, an island on the west coast of
Norway, for which Olaf would direct his course.

Sigurd had no opportunity to speak with Astrid till the evening, and
he was puzzled by her words of that morning.  Not till Alfred, Sigrid
and he went to her apartments in the evening did he receive an
explanation.  Then Astrid told them about Svein's plans for her
marriage.

"It is a shame!" exclaimed Sigrid.  "Why, in England a girl must
yield obedience to her father's wishes, but she is not forced into
marrying in this way!"

Sigurd was silent, his brows knitted.  "I am in a bad position," he
said at last.  "Of course, the simplest way out of it would be for
you to come on board the 'Crane,' and for us to join King Olaf; but I
am on a mission here that I must not neglect.  I cannot anger Svein
against Olaf, as such an action would do; not that I care for my own
sake, but it might mean ruin to my King."

Alfred agreed with him.  "Yes, you must consider your duty to Olaf;
and yet there are two sides to it--"

"No," broke in Sigurd, "there are not.  At any cost must Svein's
finger be kept out of Olaf's pie, for Svein is liable to abandon his
English trip and turn all his forces against Norway in a sudden fit
of rage.  That would be fatal to Olaf at present."

"I think I have a plan," remarked Sigrid after a moment.  "As long as
you do not appear in Astrid's escape, it will be all right, won't it?"

Sigurd nodded.

"Well then, give Wulf a few men and that cutter that is on the
'Snake,' let them take Astrid on board, and wait for you at some
place along the coast.  You must leave to-morrow or next day to
rejoin Olaf, so you can pick them up as you go, and King Svein will
think Astrid has fled of her own will."

"Good!" cried Sigurd.  "What say you to the plan, Astrid?"

"I think it is a good one, too," replied the girl, her dark eyes
sparkling, "but all my things are packed up, and I don't want to meet
King Olaf looking like this!"

She blushed as a peal of laughter went up from the rest.

"Never mind, Astrid," laughed Sigrid, "I will put a chest aboard the
'Crane' to-night; my things will fit you pretty well, and King Olaf
gave me a whole shipload of dresses."

"Better put it in the cutter," said Alfred, "for when Svein finds his
ward gone, he will search our ships first thing."

So it was arranged, that the next night Wulf, who had firmly attached
himself to the young Jarl, should wait at the dock for Astrid, who
insisted on making her way down to the harbor alone.




CHAPTER XX.

THE KING AND THE TOWEL.

Next morning Wulf was instructed in his part.  He had become firmly
attached to the young Jarl, and was eager for the business; he and
Biorn had proved wise advisors on many occasions.

In the afternoon Sigurd and Alfred went hunting with King Svein, and
the party did not return till long after nightfall.  When they
reached the castle they found the courtyard ablaze with torches.

"What is this?  What means this commotion?" roared the King,
dismounting hastily and striding forward.

Ulf, the gray-headed old seneschal, met him.  "The Lady Astrid of
Vendland has disappeared, my lord, and we can find no trace of her in
all the castle and town!"

For a moment the King's rage was terrible, and he turned on Sigurd,
his face working in fury.

"This is your doing, Jarl!  You have accepted my hospitality,
traitor, and--"

"You forget yourself, my lord," interrupted Sigurd calmly.  "I have
been with you all day, and could have known nothing of this matter.
I do not blame the girl greatly, yet you can account for my actions."

"True," replied Svein, his anger cooling under Sigurd's reply, "I beg
your pardon, Jarl, for my haste.  Will you allow my men to search
your ships?  It may be that the girl has fled on board one of them,
seeking shelter with the Lady Sigrid."

"Willingly, King," answered Sigurd, Alfred joining with him.

The King at once sent men in all directions, mounted and on foot; but
when Sigurd retired for the night nothing had been found of Astrid.

In the morning Sigurd took leave of King Svein, who, preoccupied with
the flight of Astrid, offered no hindrance to his departure,
presenting him with many gifts, indeed, which Sigurd returned in kind.

His departure was the occasion for a much more sincere and
affectionate farewell between himself and the young Saxons.  Alfred
and Sigrid stood on the deck of the "Crane" till the last moment, and
their eyes were moist as they said good-by.

"Be sure to visit us in England next year," were Alfred's parting
words.  "We will look for you in the summer at Lincoln!"

Sigurd promised to come if possible, and so the three friends parted.
As the "Crane" sailed from the harbor Sigurd's last view was of
Sigrid, standing on the forecastle of the "Snake" and waving her
scarf in farewell.

"Where are we to pick up Wulf and Astrid?" Sigurd asked Biorn, after
they had left the land behind.

"About twenty miles north, Jarl.  I sent a man with him who knew of a
small river mouth where they can lie hid without danger."

Shortly after noon Biorn, taking the helm, steered the "Crane"
carefully in to the land, skirting along the shore, and in half an
hour the cutter darted out as they passed.

"Hurrah!" shouted Sigurd, as Astrid climbed up the side.  "You have
done well, indeed, Wulf!  King Svein was completely at sea as to
where his ward had gone!"

"And now for King Olaf!" cried Astrid merrily, as Wulf carried
Sigrid's chest into the cabin and she disappeared.

It was many days before they saw the King, however, for Moster was
far up the Norwegian coast.  They made the high cliffs of Agdir
first, and sailed north along the coast; on the way they passed by
Hiorunga Bay, but did not enter, for the place recalled sad thoughts
to Sigurd's mind.

"Have you seen Vagn?" he asked Astrid, as they watched the Herey
Islands speed by.

"Oh, yes!" she exclaimed.  "How could we have forgotten to speak of
him before!  He came to see me last spring--and just think, Sigurd!
He is married!"

Sigurd gave an exclamation of surprise, and Astrid continued.

"Yes, he married a girl in Norway, and brought her back to Denmark.
He would have nothing to do with Jarl Sigvald on his return, calling
him a coward and a traitor, and the Jarl is remaining close in
Jomsborg.  Vagn himself is in the south of Denmark, where his father
owned some castles."

Sigurd was surprised to hear that his cousin was married, and he
firmly resolved to visit him as soon as the result of Olaf's
expedition was decided.  The next morning they arrived at Moster, and
before the fishing village found the four ships of Olaf, which had
arrived a few days previously.

Olaf welcomed Astrid back with much merriment.  "You seem to come
back to your friend Oli," he laughed, "and this time Oli is not going
to let you go away so soon!"

Sigurd told him the story of Astrid's flight, and the King commended
his Jarl for acting so wisely.  "If Svein had come on us now,
Fairhair, it would have been all over with us; as it is, you did
right in getting the maid away without trouble, and I am heartily
glad that you did so."

Olaf stopped at Moster for two days, and as he had first landed in
Norway there, he marked out a space on the ground, gave Thangbrand
plenty of money and materials, and left him there to build the first
church in the country.

After this Olaf sailed north day and night as the wind favored him,
following the land, but keeping to the open sea, outside the islands
which were strewn thickly along the coast.  When the wind was
contrary he anchored at the islands farthest out to sea, and did not
touch the mainland, for fear that Jarl Hakon would receive news of
his coming.  At last, just at evening, they reached Agdaness, at the
entrance to the Firth of Thrandheim.

After the ships were anchored and the awnings raised, King Olaf
visited the "Crane."

"Now, Sigurd," said he, "I wish your advice.  Thorir Klakke is on
board my ship, and you know how his plans were revealed to me by my
brothers, whom he attempted to bribe.  Well, Jarl Hakon's men are
hidden in the forest yonder, and are doubtless awaiting us; Thorir is
to take me ashore alone, as if to arrange some plan of action, and
there I am to be killed.  Now, what would you suggest doing?"

Thinking it over, Sigurd replied, "It seems to me, Olaf, as that it
would be fitting to let the traitor fall into his own trap.  Put a
score of men ashore to-night, let them hide near by, and when Hakon's
men appear let our men charge them and put them to flight, after
which Thorir should be executed."

"That is a right good scheme."  answered the King.  "I do not want to
take life, God knows, yet such criminals must be punished; and the
most fitting punishment for this man is death.  So be it."

Early the next morning Sigurd, watching from the "Crane," saw Thorir
and the King go ashore alone.  They walked along the shore, then
Thorir held up his glove, as if signaling.  The next minute a number
of men broke from the trees, but as they did so, more men rose up
from among the bowlders on the shore and put them to flight.  Two of
these latter fell on Thorir, while the King watched, and the
unfortunate man expiated his treachery with his life.

After this, Olaf, walking down to the water, shouted to Sigurd to
come ashore, which the young Jarl did.

"Come, Fairhair, let us walk up and see if we can find a farm, where
we can learn tidings of Jarl Hakon.  If he is in Thrandheim we must
fall upon him to-day or to-morrow at latest, for these men will bear
the news of our coming."

They walked up the hill, leaving their men behind, and presently came
to a little farmhouse, with a pasture behind it where some cows were
grazing.  Walking up to the door, they saw an old woman inside, and
Olaf addressed her.

"Good dame, may we have a drink of fresh milk?  We are two travelers,
and will pay for what we take."

"Welcome, friends!" replied the woman.  "Enter and I will get some
milk and bread."

While she was away, Olaf and Sigurd washed their hands at the well
beside the house, and entering again, the King took up a towel that
was lying on the table, and dried his hands on it.  At that moment
the woman returned, and snatched the towel from his hand.

"It is easy to see that you have not been brought up very well, and
have been taught little good," she cried angrily.  "Know you not that
it is wasteful to wet all the towel at once?"

Olaf responded, soberly, "Well, well, mayhap I shall still rise in
the world so high that I may dry my hands in the middle of the
towel!" Sigurd was bursting with laughter, and at this reply he could
hold in no longer, and the woman looked furiously at him.

They drank their milk, and the coin that Olaf handed the woman
somewhat appeased her.  "Tell me," he asked, "do you know where Jarl
Hakon is?"

"Last night he was in hiding, my son told me."

"In hiding!  What mean you?" exclaimed the King.

"Why, whence come you that you know not?  Within the last few months
Hakon has become so cruel and tyrannical that there is no living with
him; two days ago his exactions in Gauladale caused the bonders to
rise against him, under Orm Lugg.  They separated the Jarl from his
ships and drove him into the forest, no one knows where.  My son told
me last night, ere he crossed the Firth to join the bonders, that
they were going to look for him at the home of Thora of Rimul, a
great lady who is a relative of the Jarls."

"Well, well!" said the King, as they hastily returned to the ships.
"Think you not that heaven is with me, Fairhair?  Here I come to
Norway at the very moment when Hakon has goaded the bonders to rise
in revolt; I find him cut off from his men and ships, driven a
fugitive into the forests, mayhap slain by this time!  Come, let us
make all haste to cross the Firth and arrive at Gauladale."

So, hastily shouting out the news to the other ships as they went on
board, the prows were turned across the Firth of Thrandheim, toward
the district of Gauladale.




CHAPTER XXI.

THE DEATH OF HAKON.

As they left the shelter of the bay and drew across the Firth, the
narrow entrance of which was only two or three miles in width, three
ships were seen sailing along the opposite shore.  Olaf steered
directly for them, for without doubt these were ships of Hakon's; but
as the fleets neared each other, the three ships, evidently taking
Olaf's ships for foes, turned toward the shore.

The King dashed forward, coming up with the three ships just as they
ran up on a sandbar.  Their crews leaped overboard, wading and
swimming to shore, and directly in front of Olaf's ship was seen a
large, handsome man, swimming.  Olaf shouted, but he paid no heed;
so, seizing the tiller, the King flung it at him.  The heavy missile
struck him on the head, and he sank.

Then Olaf's men, leaping overboard, pursued the flying men, slaying
some and capturing others.  As soon as the captives were brought on
board the King interrogated them.

It seemed that the man whom Olaf had slain with the tiller was
Erland, a son of Jarl Hakon, and that these ships were going to the
Jarl's aid.  Further, the prisoners said that Jarl Hakon's forces
were utterly dispersed, that the bonders were in revolt throughout
the whole district, and that none knew where the Jarl was in hiding.

King Olaf at once landed some of his men with orders to tell everyone
who he was, why he had come, and to bid all the bonders meet him the
next day in Gauladale.  Then the five ships were steered east, going
up the Firth, and that afternoon the King was landed at Gauladale.

He found a great meeting of the chief bonders and leaders of the
revolt against Hakon in progress, and as soon as these found who he
was, they greeted him with tears of joy, and welcomed him most
heartily.  Olaf brought his chiefs, Sigurd among them, to the
assembly, and when all were seated one of the older leaders of the
peasants rose and addressed him.

"Olaf, Jarl Eirik will demand stern payment of this attack on his
father, Hakon, when he hears of it; nevertheless, we are determined
that Jarl Hakon shall die, for his life has been altogether evil.
You, however, are of the race of our old Kings, from Harald Fairhair
to your father, Triggve, and in the name of this assembly I ask you
to become King over us, at least until an assembly of the people can
be held at Thrandheim to elect you in regular form."

This caused the men of Olaf much joy, and the King accepted the offer
of leadership which they made him.  The same evening they traveled up
the valley to Rimul, where the Lady Thora lived.  It was here that
the bonders thought Jarl Hakon was in hiding, but some distance up
the valley, beside the river was found a cloak, which was recognized
as Jarl Hakon's.

"He has perished in the river!" cried many voices, and this opinion
was strengthened by finding the body of Hakon's horse farther down,
on a sandbank.  But as everyone was discussing this, an old bonder
came up to Olaf.

"Olaf," he remarked, "you know well how cunning the Jarl is, and how
skilled he is in tricks.  A man of his nature does not get carried
away by a river, however swift; can you not see that this is but a
trick to make us cease the search and disband?"

"That is so," replied Sigurd at once.  "I believe the man is right,
King."

Others assented to this opinion also, and the small army pushed on to
Rimul.  By torchlight they made a thorough search of the homestead of
Lady Thora, but without avail; so King Olaf, standing on a large
stone near the barn, cried out:

"Men, we have searched without avail for Jarl Hakon; at this time we
can do no more.  But know, that with fitting gift and payment I will
reward whoever shall slay the Jarl and bring me his head."

With that they left the homestead, and proceeded to Ladi, where they
remained for the night.  This was a very large farm and village,
belonging to the Kings of Norway, and here Olaf took up temporary
quarters.  The men were next morning landed from the ships, the
bonders were levied, and word was sent throughout the whole country
that King Olaf, son of King Triggve, had arrived to take the rule
from the hands of Hakon, and that a General Assembly of the People
was to meet at once at Thrandheim.

These things, however, were not all done in a day.  The very next
afternoon, after reaching Ladi, word was brought to King Olaf that a
man was inquiring for him, having a large package.  King Olaf and
Sigurd went to the door of the farmhouse, and saw an ill-favored man
wearing the collar of a thrall, or slave.

"What do you want of me?" inquired the King.

For answer the man opened his package and showed a human head.
Sigurd could not repress a shudder, and he turned away; the head was
that of Jarl Hakon of Norway.

Olaf called his men at once, and the thrall told his story.  He was
the tooth-thrall of Hakon, the slave, who, according to custom, had
been given the Jarl when he cut his first teeth; he had fled with
Hakon from the bonders, and the Lady Thora had made for them a sure
hiding-place in a cave beneath the pigsty, in the very yard where
Olaf had offered a reward for Hakon's head.

"What led you to betray the Jarl?" asked Olaf, angrily.

"Chiefly for the reward you promised, King, for we could hear your
voice distinctly.  So I slew him as he slept and brought his head to
you for the promised reward."

"Seize him, men!" cried Olaf, his eyes blazing with anger as he
pointed to the thrall.  "I will keep the promise which I made, to
give you a fit reward, and it will keep those who come after us from
betraying their lords!  You dog!  You were the servant of a wicked
man, but he was your master and a good one to you, and you were bound
to him by oaths the most sacred.  Your reward shall be a fitting one
indeed; take him out and behead him, men!"

When this was done, King Olaf took the thrall's head, together with
that of Hakon, and sailing out to the island of Nidarholm, which was
used as a place of execution for evildoers, the two heads were placed
on the gallows.  That night King Olaf gathered his leaders in the
farmhouse at Ladi.

"My friends," he said, "Jarl Hakon is dead, and I doubt if Jarl Eirik
will dare to attack us.  The General Assembly will be held soon, and
I trust that the people will take me for their king.  It seems to me
that only by the aid of God was the mighty Hakon overthrown so
easily; moreover, the time is come when idolatry and heathen worship
in Norway must give way to the Holy Truth.  You have come hither from
Ireland with me, and are you now willing to give your lives, if need
be, to spread the Word of God?"

"Aye!" shouted all, and after a council it was decided that as soon
as Olaf had been chosen king the first steps should be taken to stamp
out the worship of Thor and Odin at the great temple in Thrandheim.
Sigurd remembered his adventure with Vagn in that temple, and he felt
a thrill at thought of planting the Cross in place of the great
golden statue of Thor; for the words of the King had fired all his
chiefs, and Bishop Sigurd also had spoken at length.

They abode quietly at Ladi for two or three weeks, Astrid taking up
her quarters in the big farmhouse.  There was nothing to do save to
wait till the bonders met in General Assembly, and for this reason
also King Olaf waited before tearing down the great temple to Odin at
Ladi.  It would not be wise to anger the bonders before being
elected; afterwards, when he was the rightful King, it would be
different.

Finally word arrived that the delegates to the Assembly had met from
all eight districts of Norway, so Olaf and his men traveled up to
Thrandheim, at the head of the Firth.  Olaf was pretty sure of
election, for while he dwelt at Ladi most of the great men of the
country had visited him, and his handsome presence and kingly mien
had made a very favorable impression; moreover, he was well known by
reputation as one of the greatest warriors of his time.

Arrived at Thrandheim, Olaf, Sigurd, Astrid and the others of the
King's party were given apartments in the palace of Jarl Hakon, and
two mornings later they took their way to the Assembly.  Here an
immense crowd was assembled, from the whole Thrandheim district, and
as soon as the Assembly had been constituted, King Olaf stood up in
sight of all, his red-gold hair flying in the breeze, the sun
streaming from his golden armor and scarlet cloak.

"It is known to all men here assembled that I have offered myself to
be King over you.  You must expect the sternest treatment by Jarl
Eirik for the attack on his father, unless you obtain protection; on
the other hand, I have a difficult task before me in obtaining
possession of my father's realm, after being so long absent."

Olaf gave a brief account of his life and adventures, from his
boyhood up to his discovery of Thorir Klakke's treachery, his coming
to Norway, and the death of Hakon, and concluded with:

"I believe that there is no man in Norway who by legal right and
descent has so much right to the crown as I.  But I must be made King
by you, the Assembly of the People, and if you do so I will protect
you and rule you according to the ancient laws of Norway."

The tale of his exile and sufferings greatly moved the people, who
were already predisposed in his favor.  As he sat down, half the
delegates leaped to their feet.

"Skoal!  Olaf Triggveson, skoal!  We will have you to be our King,
and none other!  Skoal!"

A blare of horns mingled with shouts rent the air, and Sigurd, behind
Olaf, set his great standard flapping in the breeze.  A silence fell
over the people as they saw the Cross, but only for a moment; again
the shout arose, pealing across the town and the bay and echoing back
from hill to hill behind them:

"Skoal to King Olaf!  Skoal!"




CHAPTER XXII.

THE SACRIFICE TO THOR.

Thus was Olaf Triggveson chosen by the General Assembly to be King
over all Norway, and the rule of the land was made over to him in
accordance with the old laws, by the officers of the people.  The
bonders swore to be faithful to him, to support him while he won the
whole kingdom, and to help him to hold it; Olaf on his part promised
to observe the laws and rights of the people, and to defend it from
all invaders.

These ceremonies occupied the better part of the day, and it was
sunset before Sigurd and Astrid, who had watched the ceremony,
returned to the hall.  They saw nothing of Olaf for several days, for
he was very busy with the various leaders who flocked to his banner,
and he was raising men and sending messages to all quarters of Norway
with news of his election.

Soon, however, news arrived that the levies were not needed, for Jarl
Eirik and his brother Svein had fled to Sweden as soon as the news of
their father's death arrived.  The whole country yielded to Olaf's
rule, glad once more to have a king of the royal line of rulers, and
glad to get rid of Hakon, who to this day is known as "Hakon the Bad."

King Olaf was eager to preach the gospel to his people, but Sigurd,
his namesake the Bishop, and the other chiefs saw that Olaf must
first make his hold on the country firmer, for they foresaw that when
the people found that Olaf was intending to overturn the old faith,
there would be tumults and revolts.  The King, however, yielded only
in part to them; and refusing to dwell in Thrandheim, where the great
temple of Thor was situated, began the building of a second town,
Nidaros, a few miles distant.  So the autumn and early winter passed.

Nevertheless, the news spread that Olaf was no follower of the old
gods, and grave disturbances took place throughout the country, for
the bonders drew away from the new King when they found that he was
preaching a new faith to them.  Then one day came the news that at
many of the larger temples great meetings of the bonders had taken
place, with sacrifices to the old gods, and there the bonders had
solemnly vowed that they would not allow Olaf to preach the "White
Christ" in Norway.

Now all agreed that it was indeed time to act, unless the kingdom was
to be endangered.  The heart of the country was the district around
Thrandheim, where the land was most thickly populated, and where the
capital lay; so Olaf realized that if he once established
Christianity here, it would not be long before the rest of Norway
gave in.

With this object he called another General Assembly at Frosta, near
the capital; but as the message went forth, the bonders seized the
messengers, and substituted a war-arrow, so that all the chiefs and
great leaders assembled with a huge host, armed and ready for war.

Olaf, who came to the Assembly with only Sigurd and a score of men,
saw that he was taken in a trap; however, on the first day of the
meeting he conciliated the Assembly, although when he mentioned
Christ several of the leaders arose and forbade him to speak on
religious subjects on that day.

Sigurd saw that the bonders were in a bad mood, and that a spark
might inflame them; so that night, as he and King Olaf sat in their
tent, he said:

"Olaf, I have a plan which I think will save us all from further
trouble."

"Then, by St. Michael, let me have it!" cried Olaf, "for I am at my
wits' end for want of one!"

So Sigurd talked long with the King that evening.  The next morning,
when the Assembly opened, Olaf arose, and after a short speech said:

"Let us preserve the compact that we made before, to strengthen and
uphold each other.  To this end I will attend your great sacrifice
two weeks hence at the temple in Thrandheim, and after this we will
take counsel together concerning the faith that will be held, and we
will agree to hold to whatever faith we decide upon."

At this the bonders gave a great shout of joy, thinking that King
Olaf was yielding, and the other matters for which the Assembly had
been called passed off without trouble.

When Olaf returned to his new town of Nidaros a number of men from
Iceland received baptism, shortly after Yuletide.  Many traders and
others who were in the new city of Nidaros, remained through the
winter at Olaf's court, and most of these were also baptized in the
end.

For the next two weeks both Sigurd and the King were busy perfecting
Sigurd's plan.  The chief opponent of Christianity among the bonders
was Ironbeard, a very powerful chief who was also priest at Moeri, a
town near Thrandheim.  The winter sacrifice was to be held at the
great temple in Moeri, and if Sigurd's plan went well, all resistance
to Christianity in the district would be destroyed at one blow.

Invitations were sent out to all the chief men of the bonders, to a
feast to be held at Nidaros three days before the winter sacrifice.
The greatest chiefs and leaders of the Thrandheim districts were
invited, and all accepted, save Ironbeard and one or two others.

On the morning bidden, the invited chiefs streamed into town, on
foot, on horseback, and even on skis.  Many came over the ice from
across the bay, and by next morning the new city was filled with men,
as each chief brought a party with him.  Early in the morning Olaf
and his court attended service in the new church, all the visitors
refusing to watch the service.

Immediately afterward Sigurd led fifty men to the harbor.  There they
put on skates, and the young Jarl led them to Ladi, which was only
three miles across the ice, though more by land.

Removing their skates, Sigurd and his men tramped up from the shore
to the temple which stood on the hill, and raising his axe, Sigurd
struck the door.  In five minutes it was broken down, while the few
priests who lived near by stood watching helplessly.

Carrying out all the images, Sigurd piled them in the show ana set
fire to them as an object lesson to the watching priests and bonders
that their gods were powerless.  The temple was then stripped of its
valuables and the building itself burned.  When this was done, Sigurd
and his men made a cross out of two beams of wood, and this he
planted in the snow over the ruins of the idols.

[Illustration: _This cross he planted over the ruins of the idols._]

Then, seeing the bonders gathering fast, he stepped out and addressed
them:

"Friends, we are here by command of the King, and you have to-day
seen how powerless your gods are before the true God.  As you know,
your chiefs are now in Nidaros; when they return they will be
Christian men, no longer heathen."

With this Sigurd and his men, laden with the spoil of the temple,
returned to Nidaros.  At the harbor mouth a man met them, for it was
noontime.

"Hasten, Jarl!  The Assembly has just been called!" he cried to
Sigurd.  "King Olaf posted me here to bid you hasten to the hall."

Sigurd hurried on to the palace, bidding his men wait in the outer
rooms till he blew his horn.  Then he made his way to the hall,
entering it just as the Assembly was opened by the King.

"Chiefs and bonders," said Olaf, looking sternly around on the two
score great leaders who sat below his high-seat, "I do not forget
that you chose me to be your King, and gave me this realm of Norway;
but some two weeks ago I called a General Assembly of the people, and
there you and others refused to hear me preach the gospel of Christ,
and only by promising to attend the winter sacrifice did I escape
injury at your hands.

"Now you and all men know that I have in many places shamed the false
gods, burnt their images and temples, and in their stead have erected
the Cross of the true God.  But I am conscious of the oath which I
swore to you at that Assembly, and therefore I propose to sacrifice
to your gods the greatest and highest sacrifice that man may offer,
namely, human life."

A little murmur of joy ran around the hall as Olaf paused.  On great
occasions the Norsemen used to offer as the most acceptable sacrifice
a number of slaves or criminals, condemned to death.  At the next
words of Olaf, the joyous murmur ceased.

"I do not believe that thralls or malefactors should be offered to
the gods; instead, they should delight in the blood of noble men,
great chiefs, powerful bonders.  Since you have refused to release me
from my oath, I propose to sacrifice this sort of men, for we must do
our best to appease the gods, that they may favor us.  Am I right?"

As the King paused again, a doubtful murmur of assent rose up, and
the men, not quite sure of Olaf's meaning, fixed their eyes on the
King, who stood, handsome and erect, by his throne.

"Therefore," he continued, "I will offer to your gods the greatest
sacrifice that Norway has ever known.  You must be eager to receive
from them the reward of your service and past offerings, and for the
purpose of this offering I shall select you, Orm Lugg, you, Asbiorn
of Orness, you, Stirkar of Gimsa, you, Kar of Gryting, and I will
sacrifice you upon the high altar of Thor at Thrandeim.  And after
this, I shall select six others, the highest and worthiest men of
this district from among you, and they shall be sacrificed likewise,
that the gods may send us fruitful seasons and peace."




CHAPTER XXIII.

HOW THE CHIEFS WERE BAPTIZED.

For a moment the chiefs stared at the King, incredulous and amazed.
Then, as they caught the meaning of his ironic speech, the four men
he had named leaped to their feet, and an angry roar went up from
all.  Olaf's uplifted hand stilled the murmur.

"Wait!  You do not seem so eager for the companionship of your gods;
can it be that you doubt their power to save you?  If that is really
the case, and you wish to release me from that oath of mine, I will
be right glad to have you all baptized, and believe in the mighty,
gentle and kind God whom I and my men serve."

At these words Sigurd blew his horn, and the doors in the side of the
hall flew open.  His men brought in the spoils of the Ladi temple and
laid them at Olaf's feet, while other armed men filed silently into
the room.

"Here," exclaimed Olaf, pointing to the temple utensils and
trappings, "you see how powerless your gods are to save their
belongings!  Now think it over, while my men watch the doors; I will
return in a few minutes."

With these words he left the hall, followed by Sigurd.  Outside the
door he gripped the boy's arm joyfully, and was about to speak when
an indignant voice broke on their ears:

"What is this tale I hear, King Olaf?"

Looking up they saw before them the old English Bishop, Sigurd, clad
in his vestments.  His face was stern and cold as Olaf bowed to him.

"Is this tale true?  That you hold the Thrandheim chiefs in the great
hall, offering them their choice of baptism or death?  Answer me!"

Astounded, the King gazed at the Bishop, then after a moment his eyes
fell.

"Why, Bishop, it is true, certainly!  What mean you?"

The old man's eyes flashed.  "Think you that this is the way to
spread the gospel of Christ?  Is baptism a thing to be forced on men,
or a thing which they must choose willingly?  Better lose this
kingdom of yours and flee back over the ocean again than to do this
thing, Olaf Triggveson!"

At this the boy spoke out.  "Bishop, it it my fault, for I suggested
the plan; but why is it so bad?  Did not the chiefs entrap Olaf a
week or two ago?"

Bishop Sigurd turned on him.  "What of that?  Do as you will with the
bodies of these men, Olaf, but force not their souls!  Let them come
to Christ willingly."  His voice softened.  "I know that you both are
only overzealous; but believe me, King and Jarl, this is not
Christianity.  Christ said, 'Come unto me'; think you he would have
men driven to him with whips and swords, who died to save men?"

Olaf bent his head, and Sigurd dropped on his knees.  "Pardon,
Bishop!  I had not thought of it that way; I see how wrong it was
now!"

The Bishop put his hand on Sigurd's head.  "And you, Olaf?  Do you
not see that I am right?  Must you be led by this boy?"

Olaf, fixing his keen eyes on the old man, nodded slowly.  "I see,
Bishop, and I will obey your unspoken thought."

He turned slowly, and Sigurd followed him to the door of the great
hall.  As they entered there was a hush, and Olaf curtly bade his men
leave the building, waiting in silence as they filed out.

Then, ascending the high-seat, he said bitterly:

"Chiefs, I came among you preaching the Word of God, the gospel of
peace and salvation; but my own acts have been as those of a pagan
and worse.  Small wonder that you refused to accept my faith!  Too
late I see that I have done ill by you; now I stand ready to repair
my faults, and to act as a true Christian.  Go in peace; those of you
who wish to accept Christianity will be welcomed.  If it is your wish
that a heathen King rule over you, I will return whence I came, and
will bring no fire and sword into the land."

The chiefs gazed in amazement at the King, and Orm Lugg, one of the
greatest spoke out:

"Is this truth, King?  Are we free to go to our homes?"

"Yes," said Olaf, a flush mounting to his brow.  "I have proved
myself a poor Christian, friends, but forgive me for this time; go,
and whatever is your will I shall abide by it."

One by one, silent, incredulous, the chiefs left the hall, and Sigurd
alone remained with the King.  Then the boy, grasping Olaf's hand,
cried with tears in his eyes:

"Olaf, we have been wrong, but how you must suffer!  Will you really
go back to Ireland if the chiefs refuse to accept the gospel?"

"Yes, my friend," and Olaf's tone was very low and soft.  "The good
Bishop yonder showed me more in that minute than I can tell you.  I
have been proud, Sigurd, and my pride is shattered; the Hammer of
Thor is not like Christ's Cross.  I thought to use the Cross like a
weapon, like Thor uses his Hammer; but the Cross is a symbol, not of
pride and might, but of gentleness, of pity, of humility.  Yes, my--"

Suddenly the doors opened, and in came the chiefs, to the King's
amazement.  Their faces were very changed now; the fierceness, the
resistance, seemed to have given way to some new emotion.

"King Olaf," said Orm, the spokesman, "we found it as you said; the
palace is unguarded, the streets are clear.  Oh, King, I have a hard
thing to say, but mayhap you will understand!  Listen.

"We bonders have in truth resisted your faith because, as you said
just now, you preached one thing to us, and you acted another thing.
We have resisted, not because we love the old gods, but because we
could not see wherein the White Christ was better."

Orm paused, fixing his eyes on the King's.  "But to-day, King Olaf,
you have shown us a new thing.  We have not known you long, yet we
have found in you a strong man, a proud man, a man used to ruling the
wills of others, and for this we have rejoiced in a worthy King.
To-day, Olaf, we have found that there was one thing stronger than
these, a thing able to overcome all your strength, pride--even your
will; and because this is so, we freely accept from your hand the
Cross of Christ."

For a moment Olaf gazed at the men around him, unable to speak.
Then, the tears flowing down his cheeks, he pressed their hands, one
by one, and said:

"My friends, this is a victory where I had found a defeat.  I cannot
tell you what it means to me, but I think that none of us will forget
this day.  Jarl Sigurd and I have to-day learned a lesson from you
and from ourselves; pray God we may never have to learn it over
again!"

Then Sigurd summoned the Bishop, telling him what had happened on the
way, and without delay the chiefs were baptized in Olaf's new church,
together with their men.  That night Olaf and Sigurd sat in Astrid's
chamber, talking over the events of the day until late.

King Olaf had given Astrid part of Jarl Hakon's forfeited estates, to
compensate her for those she possessed in Vendland, so that she might
be able to live as became her dignity; further, he constituted
himself her ward, although with the laughing declaration that he
would run the risk of forcing her to marry against her will.  He had
also promised to give Sigurd an earldom, as soon as he had put the
country into some kind of order.

"What are now your plans, my lord?" asked the girl, that same night.
Olaf shook his head.

"Truly, Astrid, I know not.  Practically all of the greater chiefs
from the Thrandheim districts were baptized to-day, and I think that
the bond established between us will never be broken.  Ironbeard
alone holds out; I am strongly minded to visit him at once, during
the winter sacrifice, and try to win him over.  To-morrow, Sigurd, we
will go to Thrandheim and demolish the great temple there."

For a minute Sigurd looked at Olaf, then the latter smiled.  "No,
Sigurd, I have learned my lesson.  There will be no bloodshed, either
there or at the winter sacrifice, if I can help it.  But the greatest
chiefs have been baptized; now it is essential that Ironbeard be
either forced to accept my rule or leave the country."

So, without the least opposition, Olaf and Sigurd burned the old
temple of the war-god the very next day.  Many of the chiefs so
recently baptized showed their sincerity by joining Olaf or sending
men to his aid; and the idols were taken out before all the people,
and burned.  Sigurd longed for Vagn to be there, as he remembered
their adventure with Jarl Hakon; but his cousin was far away to the
south.

The work was finished by midday, and the party returned to Nidaros.
The sudden conversion of their greatest chiefs seemed to have
demoralized the bonders, for no longer were threats heard against
Olaf, but instead, many of them came to Nidaros and were baptized by
the good Bishop.

The day after the destruction of the Thrandheim temple, Olaf prepared
to go to Moeri, where the winter sacrifice was held.  He took all his
men, sailing up Thrandheim Firth with his largest ships, and came to
Moeri the day of the sacrifice.

The King sent Sigurd ashore, demanding that the people first hold an
Assembly.  Fairhair found a great multitude assembled from all the
countryside, with Ironbeard and his men all present.  They at once
agreed to Olaf's demand, so the King landed with his men, and the
Assembly was constituted on the plain before the temple.

When the noise and talking of the opening had subsided, Olaf arose in
his seat and told the bonders what had taken place in his hall at
Nidaros, told them how he had found his mistake, and would no longer
try to force a religion on them that they did not want.

Sigurd could see a change sweep over the faces of the bonders before
him, and they glanced at each other and began whispering.  At this,
however, Ironbeard leaped to his feet--an immense man, wearing the
robes of a priest of Thor, and with an iron-gray beard that swept
over his chest.  He lifted his hand and began to speak, slowly and
with great dignity.




CHAPTER XXIV.

OLAF'S ATONEMENT.

"King Olaf," rang out the priest's deep voice, "we are unwilling that
you should violate our religion.  The wish of us all is that you
should offer sacrifice as other kings before you have done, and even
as Jarl Hakon did.  When King Hakon, foster son of King Athelstan of
England, wished to proclaim the White Christ, he found the bonders
too strong for him, and he yielded to the old faith.  The only proper
plan for you is to do likewise, for our minds have not changed since
that Assembly wherein you promised to visit this temple at this time."

Ironbeard sat down, and his speech was loudly applauded by the
bonders who sat around, and by the great crowd without.  Olaf flushed
at the chief's proud demands, but controlling his temper, he rose.

"My friends, I promised to visit your temple, and I shall do so now,
before the sacrifices.  The Assembly is closed."

With this he motioned to Sigurd, and, followed by his men, who had
laid aside their arms, he walked to the door of the temple.  Olaf
held in his hand a gold-mounted staff of heavy wood, and as they
entered he said to Sigurd:

"Jarl, do just as I do, and act quickly."

Inside they saw many images around the temple, and occupying the
place of honor was a large idol, heavily adorned with gold and
silver.  The temple was now full of Olaf's men, while Ironbeard and
the bonders stood in the doorway, watching him.

Without another word the King walked up to the large idol, and
raising his heavy staff, struck it.  The idol toppled over, fell to
the stone floor, and broke in two parts.  At the same instant Sigurd
and his men rushed at the other images and swept them from their
pedestals.

A loud cry of horror arose from the bonders, and Ironbeard, seizing a
spear, poised it, in the act of hurling it at the King.  As he did
so, one of Olaf's men, who was outside, pierced him with an arrow,
and he fell at the temple threshold.

The bonders drew back, in terror, and the King turned angrily.

"Who fired that arrow?" he shouted.  The man who had done so stepped
to the door.

"It was I, King Olaf, and I did it to save your life.  Ironbeard had
poised a spear at you--see, it is even now in his hand!"

Olaf looked at the fallen leader, and saw that the man spoke truly.
"Order the Assembly called," he said to Sigurd.  "Bid them have no
fear."

When the people had taken their places again, Olaf came out of the
temple and addressed them from the steps:

"Friends and bonders, I did not come here to shed blood, and I am
bitterly grieved that Ironbeard drew his fate on himself.  As I told
you a little time ago, I will compel no man to leave his faith; I
have discovered the wickedness of that course.  But a few days ago
your other chiefs, some of whom stand at my side, accepted from my
hands the Cross of Christ, and now I offer it to you also.

"You have seen how your gods have fallen and broken.  Where is their
power, think you?  The true God has protected me, has brought me to
this kingdom and given it into my hand without a struggle, and
whether you will it or not, his faith will prevail in Norway before
many more years have passed."

The King paused, and one of the bonders arose to reply.

"Oh, King, your words to-day have fallen pleasantly on our ears, and
we easily perceive that you have truth and justice in your heart.  We
see, too, that the gods are dead, and that they have no power before
the Cross of the White Christ.  But, King Olaf, the slaying of
Ironbeard was an evil deed, whether you intended it or not, and
before we say more on this subject we would like to know whether you
will punish his murderer."

The bonder sat down amid a faint murmur of applause, and the Assembly
fixed their eyes on Olaf.  For a moment the King sat in silence, and
it was evident that he was struggling with himself; then his face
cleared.

"My people, I will not punish the man, for he saved my life.  Wait!
I am not through.  Are there any relatives of Ironbeard present?"

Two men stood up.  "We are distant relatives of his, oh, King, but he
has left no others to mourn him save a single daughter."

King Olaf took off his helm.  "My people, this is a lawful Assembly,
able to give judgment and to punish criminals, with power to inflict
penalty for offenses.  I appoint you two bonders judges, and I take
upon my own head the blood of Ironbeard.  Whatever you shall think
right, I will agree to, in compensation for his death.  Whether you
demand my life, or my exile, or a scat in money, these will I give,
and you shall fear no punishment from my men."

At these words a silence fell on the host, and Sigurd gazed at Olaf
in love and admiration.  Truly, old Bishop Sigurd had not spoken in
vain!  A murmur of appreciation of Olaf's generous offer passed from
mouth to mouth, and presently the two relatives of Ironbeard, after
conferring together, stood up.

"King Olaf, by these words of yours you have indeed shamed us, who
came to this Assembly with arms, and with war in our hearts.  It is a
new departure in Norway, that her Kings should offer themselves under
the laws like common men; and yet it seems not unfair to us that you
should do so.  The laws declare that for the shedding of blood the
relatives of the dead man may claim the life of the slayer, or they
may claim a scat in lands or goods.  Now, King Olaf, Ironbeard has
left no family save a daughter, who has no lack of wealth and is of
good family.  We, therefore, her relatives, lay this judgment upon
you: that you make her your lawful wife and bestow upon her lands
befitting her position as Queen."

The King's men uttered a growl of protest, even Sigurd looking
somewhat blank, for the King had thought of marrying one of the
daughters of the Swedish King, to make an alliance between the two
nations.  Olaf, however, checked the murmur with a gesture, and
replied to the bonders:

"My friends, this is a lawful judgment, and I accept it with good
will.  I will expect you two men to look to it that the maid is sent
to Nidaros before Eastertide, at which time I shall marry her and
make her the Queen of this land.  It is the least I can do, methinks,
after my men have killed her father and left her alone in the world.
Should this plan not meet with her consent, I will expect you to
appoint other penalty, which I will fulfill most faithfully, and this
I swear on the Cross."

Olaf sat down amid a shout of approval and joy from the bonders, and
a dozen men rose at once to speak.  Making one of their number
spokesman, he addressed the King.

"My lord, when I left home it was my firm intention to resist your
faith to the last drop of my blood; but now I am proud to take
baptism from your hands, and to swear anew my allegiance to you."

Olaf started up in surprise, and one by one the other bonders rose
and declared their intention to be baptized.  Then Olaf sent for
Bishop Sigurd, whom he had left at the ships, fearing that Ironbeard
might attack him, and turned to the bonders.

"My people, nothing that you could do would give me more pleasure
than this thing.  It is the dearest wish of my heart that this land
of Norway should become Christian, and once you and the other leaders
of Thrandheim and the districts around have received baptism, we will
meet with little opposition from the rest of the land.  In pledge of
your earnestness I ask that you complete the destruction of this your
temple to the old gods, and on its site I will erect at my own
expense a church to the true God."

Shouting and clashing their arms, the bonders sprang up without an
instant's hesitation.  They ran to the temple, carried out the broken
images, and piled them in the snow, while others stripped the temple
of its furnishings and set fire to it.  As the pile of idols broke
into flame, old Bishop Sigurd arrived from the ships.

He had been told the whole story on the way up the hill, and he
gripped Olaf's hand silently but heartily as the King met him.  At
once the work of baptism was begun, Sigurd and the rest of the King's
men taking part in the service, and standing as godfathers to the new
converts.

When this was finished the afternoon was nearly spent, and after
arranging with the leaders of the people for the building of a
church, for the burial of Ironbeard, and for the sending of his
daughter Gudrun to Nidaros at Easter, Olaf's men embarked, and the
King sailed back down the Firth to Nidaros.

A few days before this the Firth had opened, for although it was
still winter, the weather had warmed somewhat, and a channel had been
made from above Moeri to the open sea.  When the fleet came to the
harbor that night, they found the town alight with torches, and lying
in the harbor were several newly arrived ships, or rather cutters,
for they were small.

"I wonder what this means?" said the King, as they drew into the
anchorage.  "I had no tidings of visitors, when we left the city
yesterday, and it is strange that the town is all alight!"

So before the ships had come to anchor, Olaf and Sigurd leaped into a
small boat and were rowed ashore.  Their ships had been seen
entering, for great fires were lit on either side of the harbor,
making everything plain to the sight, and a crowd of men met them as
they landed.

"What is all this excitement about?" demanded the King, looking
around in wonder.

A confused talking answered him.  "Here, one at a time!" shouted
Olaf, and one of the men stepped to his side.

"We have been driven from home, my lord King, and we come from the
north.  There two chiefs, Raud the Strong and Thori Hart, have
revolted against the White Christ, have gathered a fleet, and are
sailing against you.  They are preparing to restore the temples of
Thor and Odin and to burn the churches you have built; we, who are
Christians, have barely escaped with our lives, fleeing in our small
boats.  The heathen will enter the Firth in a few days, unless you
meet them first!"




CHAPTER XXV.

THE WRESTLING MATCH.

Olaf at once went to the great hall, and there the fugitives came
before him and told their story.  The two Northern chieftains had
taken advantage of the unexampled spell of warm weather to raise a
fleet and sail down the coast, thinking to come upon the King just as
he had come upon Jarl Hakon.

Olaf quickly consulted with Sigurd, the Bishop, and his other
leaders, and their opinion was that not a minute was to be lost.  If
the King embarked that night and sailed out of the Firth, he would
reach the entrance by morning, and could wait for the heathen fleet
there.

The King agreed to this plan, and at once sent word to his men to
return on board the ships.  The Thrandheim chiefs now proved their
loyalty by refusing to return to their homes.

"No, King," said they, "you have dealt with us fairly and honorably,
and we are sensible of it.  We and our men will be of use if it comes
to a battle, and the enemy may lose heart when they see us, for
evidently they count on our forces joining them.  So set up our
standards on your ships, and we will gladly accompany you."

At this decision the King was overjoyed, for with these men were
several hundred warriors in all, who had gathered at the Moeri
Assembly.  So a few hours later Olaf and Sigurd left Nidaros again,
with a dozen ships, while more would follow as soon as they had been
taken off their winter dry-docks.

The ships rowed down the Firth all night, while Olaf and Sigurd
rested.  The day had been a terribly hard one on both, and they were
glad to get what sleep they could before meeting the advancing foes.

The week of warm weather seemed a wonderful thing to all the men, and
not a few ascribed it to the favor of heaven upon Olaf.  It was only
barely past Yuletide, and although no one expected the warm weather
to last, few of the oldest men could remember a winter when
Thrandheim Firth had remained open, or had opened before April.

By morning they were outside the cape of Agdaness, where the traitor
Thorkel had been executed.  The King ordered the ships to be hove to
here, in order to wait for the six other ships which were following
from Nidaros.  All day long they waited, seeing nothing of the
rebels.  Two or three small ships, bearing more fugitives, came down
the coast, and gave Olaf the news that Raud and Thori were only
fifteen miles to the north, that they had landed at Theksdale, and
were summoning men to join them from all the country.

That afternoon the reinforcements came up from Nidaros, and the King
held a council on his ship the "Crane."

"First," he said, "I am resolved that if it can possibly be avoided
there shall be no bloodshed in this matter.  Now let me have your
council on how we shall act to gain these rebels over, if that can be
done."

Sigurd spoke first.  "It may be that you did not note it, King Olaf,
but old Biorn, my forecastle man, is strongly of the opinion that
to-night a heavy frost will set in.  This warm weather has not been
natural at all; even this afternoon the sun has been growing somewhat
colder.

"Now, if a frost returns to-night, it will be no light one, and Biorn
says that the Firth will again be closed to us.  In this case, it
seems to me that any ships lying along the shore would be frozen
fast, especially if they were in such a narrow bay as that at
Theksdale.  I think that Raud and Thori will give little heed to
their ships, drawing them on shore carelessly, or perhaps anchoring
them near by; and if this is the case, and we come upon them
suddenly, they will probably be so disheartened at the loss of their
ships, and at being left so far from home without means of retreat,
that they will give in."

A cry of delight broke from the King and the others.  "That is the
very solution of it!" exclaimed Olaf.  "But--it depends on whether or
not a frost sets in.  In any case we will leave the land, so as not
to be frozen in ourselves."

The chiefs separated to their respective vessels, and all sailed out
two or three miles to sea, where they lay tossing quietly.  At sunset
Bishop Sigurd, who was aboard the "Crane," conducted a solemn
service, during which he offered a solemn prayer that God would favor
their enterprise; as the men on all the ships joined in the
responses, it seemed to Sigurd Fairhair that never had he witnessed a
more impressive sight than this.  Eighteen ships, all crowded with
men, a large portion of whom had only a few days before been
worshipers of idols, lay grouped together in the sunset glow, while
from them arose a devout and heart-felt prayer to the White Christ.

No sooner had the sun set and darkness fallen upon the ocean, than
the night turned bitterly cold.  Many of the men, not expecting this,
had left off their furs and cloaks, so that the others divided theirs
among all.  In some of the ships were bales of merchandise, and at
the King's order these were opened by torchlight and all the men
without cloaks were furnished with them.

By midnight it was evident that the intense cold would close the
Firth, and as Sigurd had foreseen, would also hold the enemy
helpless.  Amid a shout of rejoicing from all the men, the prows were
turned north, and the ships rowed swiftly toward Theksdale, for there
was not a breath of wind, and every minute the cold seemed to
increase.

With sunrise the pilots announced that they were not far from their
goal, and an hour later they rounded the islands outside Theksdale
Bay.  There, however, they were stopped by a ragged line of ice,
nearly a foot thick, which had formed during the night.

In all haste, for as yet they had not come around the headland into
the bay itself, the crews disembarked without mishap, and gained the
shore, leaving men on board the ships to keep them safe.  They made
their way, under guidance of men who knew the coast, across the
headland; and there before them lay the army of revolt, their fleet
fast-bound in fetters of ice along the shore!

"Come," exclaimed Olaf to his nearest leaders, "we must lose no time,
for, see, they are cutting the ships out of the ice!"

So, leading the way, he dashed over the rocks of the shore, and as
the first shouts of alarm went up from the heathen army, Olaf and
part of his men stood between them and their ships, while over the
brow of the hill poured the remainder of his forces.

[Illustration: _Olaf and his men stood between them and their ships._]

The rebel camp seethed and boiled with men, but seeing that Olaf made
no move to attack them, their haste quieted somewhat, and in a few
minutes two well-appareled chiefs left the tents and with a dozen men
approached the King.

"Have we safe conduct, King Olaf?" shouted one.

"Have no fear," replied Olaf, "come in peace."

As they approached, men who knew them whispered to the King that
these were Raud the Strong and Thori Hart.  Both were of lofty
stature and magnificently built, with strong, vigorous features.
They stopped a dozen paces from the King.

"From your appearance you are Olaf Triggveson," said one.  "I am Raud
the Strong, and this is Thori Hart.  Have you come in peace or in
war, oh, King?"

A smile ran around Olaf's men, and he himself laughed outright.

"That is a strange question, Raud, when you have attacked my people
and declared your intention of driving me from the land!"

The other two flushed, and Raud's face darkened.  "You have caught
me," he cried angrily, "by fault of the Ice King, where my men can
ill defend themselves, and I see that you have many more warriors
than I looked for; yet you will not find me the last to cross swords
with you, Olaf!"

"Hold, Raud," answered Olaf, "I mean not to attack you.  Now see, I
have your ships yonder, I have a much larger force than you, and yet
if you will not yield willingly to me you shall depart in peace to
your homes, on condition simply that you abandon the revolt against
my rule."

"Why," cried Thori Hart in wonder, "we thought that you made choice
of the Cross or the sword to your subjects!  Mean you that we will
not be forced to baptism?"

Olaf smiled sadly.  "You will not, Thori.  All the chiefs in the
Thrandheim districts have been baptized, but willingly, as those with
me here can testify.  Now, what is your decision?"

The two whispered together for a minute, until finally Raud spoke up,
advancing toward the King.

"You have fairly overcome us, King Olaf, and we thank you for our
lives.  Still, I am not ready to accept your faith.  I am a great
priest of Thor in the north, and you seem to be the champion of the
White Christ, so I propose that you and I pray to our gods, and after
that we indulge in a wrestling match.  The winner, he who first
throws the other to earth, shall bestow his faith on all the men of
the loser.  This Thori and I agree to, if you will also."

Olaf, without hesitation, replied, "I will accept the trial, here and
now, trusting to the mercy of Almighty God that he will nerve my arm
against your power and that of your false gods!

"But one condition I would make, Raud; that is, that whoever loses
this contest shall forfeit his life with it."

The viking joyfully agreed, and then returned to his camp.  The men
of King Olaf had all arrived, and as word of the challenge passed
through the army, more than one covert smile was seen, for already
men said that Olaf was the strongest man in all the land.

It was so bitterly cold that a great fire was built, and on one side
of the space, scraped clear of snow, marked out for the match,
grouped Olaf's men; on the other side the heathen followers of Raud
stood, full of confidence in their leader, for he was very strong,
whence his name, and skilled in wrestling.

Stepping into the open space between the two armies, Olaf and Raud
threw off their helmets and armor, and took hold of each other.




CHAPTER XXVI.

THE CROSS AND THE HAMMER.

Sigurd's heart sank as he saw the mighty muscles and powerful limbs
of the pagan; but he glanced at Olaf, and while the latter's muscles
were not so big, he knew that there was terrible strength in them.

At first the opponents tried out each other carefully; then,
gradually warming up, Raud made terrific attempts to throw Olaf, but
the latter resisted every endeavor, seemingly without effort.  Now
was seen the difference in the two men's lives, for while Raud
speedily lost his wind, became flushed and tired, King Olaf looked as
fresh as when he began the conflict, owing to his temperate life.

As the viking weakened, Olaf suddenly seized him by the thigh in an
unguarded moment, and with a movement of his hands flung the man over
his head.  Amid a shout from his men, and a groan of dismay from
those of Raud, the latter struck the ground, Olaf leaping to his side.

As the fallen man struggled up, the King seized his hand and aided
him.  "You have won fairly, Olaf," gasped Raud, looking with
wondering eyes on his antagonist, "and my life is yours."

"Nay," said the King, kindly, handing the viking his garments, "I
seek no man's blood, Raud.  All I ask is that you serve me
faithfully, and you shall have the same lands that you held from
Hakon."

Messengers were at once despatched overland to Nidaros, to tell of
the outcome of the conflict; then, after Raud, Thori and his men had
been baptized, for they accepted the condition willingly, Olaf
embarked his men again and they returned south.

The Firth was of course closed again, so the ships were drawn ashore
for the winter, and the chiefs of the bonders left the King for their
homes, while he pushed on across the snow-clad hills with his own
men.  At Ladi they crossed the ice to Nidaros, and were received with
much joy.

At Eastertide the marriage of King Olaf and Gudrun, the daughter of
Ironbeard, was solemnized by Bishop Sigurd; and at the same time
Sigurd Fairhair and Astrid were married.  The wedding was a surprise
to no one, as the whole court knew the story of their adventures, and
had long since agreed that sooner or later the two would be wedded.

Easter of this year came late in April, and the Firth had been open
for some time.  As the procession left the church and wended through
the streets of Nidaros to the great hall, a wonderful ship was seen
entering the harbor.  The prow ended in a dragon's head, the stern in
the coils and tail of a dragon; both prow and stern were gilded,
shining bravely in the morning sun.  The hoisted sail represented a
dragon's wings, and the glistening oar blades the beast's legs.

A cry of amazement went up from all, but the King turned, with a
smile at Sigurd.

"This ship I have had built in secret, and it is my wedding gift to
my faithful Jarl, Sigurd Fairhair.  It is not fitting that a Jarl of
mine should be landless, so I also bestow on him the earldom of the
Agdirs, and command that he take his wedding journey thither in this
his new ship!"

* * * * * *

Four years later King Olaf Triggveson, with a few of his ships, was
entrapped by the treacherous Jarl Sigvald among the islands of Svold
Sound, while the main part of his fleet was out at sea.

Here had gathered his enemies--the King of Sweden, King Svein, of
Denmark, who had turned against Olaf, and the heathen men of Norway,
who had chosen rather to leave the land than to accept the Cross.
One by one the King's ships were taken, although he made such a
defense as Norway had never seen, and at one time it seemed as though
he would win, even against such odds.  Then Jarl Eirik, the son of
Jarl Hakon, tore the dragon-prows from his ships, and rowed to the
attack under the sign of the Cross.

As the last of King Olaf's men fell on his forecastle, the King threw
aside his shield and sprang overboard.  He was famous as a swimmer
through all the lands of the north, and now he dived deeply, swimming
under the keels of his enemies' ships, so that it seemed to them that
he had drowned.

Coming up outside the ring of vessels, the King swam swiftly to a
fishing boat that lay in by the islands, and was pulled aboard by
Sigurd and his wife Astrid, who had come too late to warn Olaf of the
plot to betray him.  That night, with his wounds bound, the King sat
in the stern of the boat, which sailed swiftly south.

Sigurd urged Olaf to go north, offering to take him to his fleet,
which could return and meet the invaders, but the King refused.

"No, my friends, I cannot do this.  Toward the end of the fight Jarl
Eirik hoisted the Cross, and I believe he made a vow that he and his
men would renounce the old gods forever if he conquered me.
Therefore, it seems to me that by the will of God, Norway has become
Christian at last, and also I am not without fear that God has been
displeased with my rule."

"Then shall we go to England with you?  You have many great friends
there, and King Ethelred, who is almost driven from his kingdom by
the Danes, would gladly give you a share of his realm," said Astrid.
Again the King shook his head.

"No," he replied, "let me be as dead to the realm of Norway, for I
will never trouble it again.  I will go to Rome, and after that to
Jerusalem.  There the Crusaders rule the Holy Land, and I will join
them and devote the rest of my life to serving against the Moslem.  I
believe that God used me as an instrument for giving his Word to
Norway, and now that this is accomplished, it were best to give peace
to this troubled realm."

Seeing that it was useless to urge Olaf further, Sigurd sadly gave
up, and two days later they arrived in his earldom of Agdir.  Here
the King remained for two weeks, then, fearing that his presence
would bring trouble on his old friends, decided that he would at once
start on his pilgrimage.

"Make your peace with the conquerors, Sigurd," he said.  "They will
be glad to retain you in your possessions here."

With this he selected a score of men and a small ship of Sigurd's,
and departed from Norway forever.  As he and Sigurd and Astrid stood
together on the forecastle, just as the anchor was raised, the King
said sadly:

"My friends, it is for the best, believe me, and now peace will come
to the land.  The faith of Christ has been established, and although
men may return at times to the old gods, I think that it will not be
for long.  Now take this sword of mine, even as you took one long ago
in Ireland, and wear it in memory of me; I will never use a weapon
again, save in defense of the Holy Land."

Embracing the King with tears, Sigurd and Astrid left the ship; and
an hour later it was a white speck far on the horizon.

"Come, Astrid," said Sigurd, "we will never see Olaf again; yet he
will always be remembered as the first King of Norway to overthrow
the Hammer of Thor, and to plant in its stead the Cross of Christ!"



THE END.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CROSS AND THE HAMMER ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
